Here are this week's five freeCodeCamp resources that are worth your time:

1. freeCodeCamp just published a comprehensive beginner course on modern Front End Development using React and Tailwind CSS. You can code along at home and build your own  React project. Along the way, you'll learn about component-based development, utility-first styling, state management, and more. By the end of the course, you’ll have foundational knowledge that you can use to build more of your app ideas. (6 hour YouTube course): https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/learn-react-and-tailwind-css-for-front-end-development/

2. Learn about Zero-Trust Architecture and how to implement it. “Trust no one, verify everything.” That's the approach that these authentication systems take to minimize risk of intrusion or attack. This security tutorial will teach you about Role-Based Access Control, JWT Token Management, Continuous Verification, and other approaches to architecting your apps. (50 minute read): https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/how-to-implement-zero-trust-authentication-in-your-web-apps/

3. On this week's freeCodeCamp podcast I interview Dilip Krishnamoorthi. He's a senior software engineer who works at Sony building user interfaces for Playstation game consoles. We talk about how he dropped out of a traditional Indian university and used an inexpensive distance learning program to finish his engineering degree for about the cost of a Playstation 5. He also shares what it's like to work in Bengaluru – the Silicon Valley of Asia – and contrasts that with San Francisco where he now works. Dilip loves learning new tools and shares his thoughts on AI agents and tips for keeping up with the state of the art. (1 hour watch or listen in your favorite podcast app): https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/senior-playstation-engineers-tips-for-learning-new-tools-and-getting-things-done-podcast-184/

4. freeCodeCamp also published this handbook on how to leverage React and Next.js streaming functionality to turbo-charge your app loading speeds for your users. Instead of waiting for the server to send one big bundle of HTML, streaming lets you progressively send blocks as others finish rendering. This makes your app feel much smoother. If you're serious about performance and user experience, this is the handbook for you. (full length handbook): https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/the-nextjs-15-streaming-handbook/

5. And if you want to go even deeper into React, freeCodeCamp also published this advanced handbook on Shared State Complexity. What happens when several different parts of your app need to access and update the same information at the same time? This handbook breaks down several approaches to addressing this fundamental problem. You'll learn about State Management, The Context API, Prop Drilling, and more. (full length handbook): https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/shared-state-complexity-in-react-handbook/

A gentle reminder that freeCodeCamp is a 501(c)(3) tax-exempt charity. We don't have any investors or owners. Even I don't have any equity. We're instead owned by the public. That is: we're owned by you. So please help take care of your possession by supporting our charity and our mission :) https://www.freecodecamp.org/donate

Quote of the Week: 
“History has taught us: never underestimate the amount of money, time, and effort someone will expend to thwart a security system. It's always better to assume the worst. Assume your adversaries are better than they are. Assume science and technology will soon be able to do things they cannot yet. Give yourself a margin for error. Give yourself more security than you need today. When the unexpected happens, you'll be glad you did.” — Bruce Schneier, software engineer and security expert

Until next week, happy coding.

-- Quincy Larson

Teacher and founder of freeCodeCamp.org

If these aren't worth your time, you can turn them off: https://www.freecodecamp.org/ue/eZV2T3gHC7IGcwcpYPG64
