A visual quiz about the stock market. SoftBank continues to flounder. Demonetisation people are back again.

Good morning Ishan,

The best part about remote working is that it reveals character. Or characters. Like Batman. Or Pluto.

Just look at what The Ken’s daily Zoom call looked like yesterday.

Maybe you are locked in like the rest of us, figuring out how to work remotely and fight off cabin fever.

Maybe you can’t afford to be, and have to venture out everyday, risking lives.

Maybe your employer doesn’t care and insists that you come to the office.

Maybe, god forbid, you have a loved one who is affected.

There’s some irony here. The Nutgraf is a newsletter that’s supposed to connect the dots and make sense of the world around us. Right now, it looks like the world itself is coming to an end, partly because we are so tightly connected. There’s bad news everywhere, and little respite, so this week, I figured I’ll try something different. I can’t make up good news, but I suppose I can make the bad stuff fun, and the fun stuff even more bizarre. All told visually. Just like our Zoom calls.

So here it is, the fun, visual edition of The Nutgraf.

Quiz Question. Identify this stock market bulwark

So, the Indian stock market, just like every other stock market in the world, has collapsed. The Sensex, India’s stock index, registered its highest weekly fall in ten years this week.

Except, most notably, one.

As a succinct investor delicately put it on Twitter:

“In this deep red sea, this <expletive> is rising like anything”

He does have a point. Just look at the state of some of the strongest stocks in India over the last week.

Here’s HDFC Bank, the largest private bank in India.

Here’s Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC), which practically has a monopoly on ticket bookings for the largest rail network in the world.

Here’s Reliance Industries, arguably the mightiest company in India, which has been sliding for nearly a month...

And here’s our mystery company, the one which was referred to in the tweet, that’s rising, and rising and rising.

So what’s the stock in question? Identify. Ten marks.

(Answer at the end of this newsletter.)

"Are we fools?"

I don’t know if you’ve watched the animated TV series Avatar: The Last Airbender. If you haven’t, here’s a quick summary from the opening sequence https://avatar.fandom.com/wiki/Opening_sequence.

Water. Earth. Fire. Air. Long ago, the four nations lived together in harmony. Then, everything changed when the Fire Nation attacked. Only the Avatar, master of all four elements, could stop them, but when the world needed him most, he vanished.

This reminds me a lot of the telecom industry in India.

We have written extensively in the past https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/back-to-the-future/ about what’s going on https://the-ken.com/the-nutgraf/back-to-the-future/ in India’s telecom industry. We have written about how telecom is crucial for India’s digital economy future. Telcos are the ones who carry the burden and also reap the rewards of getting India’s massive population online—primarily by offering affordable data plans. Never before in India’s history has its future rested on so few companies—Airtel, Vodafone Idea, Reliance Jio, and BSNL.

Last week, with India shutting down many of its offices and pushing employees to work from home, India’s telcos were needed more than ever.

Last week, one came closer to vanishing.

Here’s The Hindu BusinessLine https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/companies/supreme-court-ruling-brings-vodafone-idea-closer-to-insolvency-bernstein/article31106684.ece:

The Supreme Court’s latest ruling on the issue of Adjusted Gross Revenue creates a dire situation for Vodafone Idea, according to analysts at Bernstein.

"We do not see how they can meet the demands of the court and are, therefore, in threat of insolvency," Bernstein analysts said in a research report.

Remember, this entire situation was precipitated by the Indian government insisting that Vodafone Idea pay an astronomical sum in additional taxes based on an Adjusted Gross Revenue. It even dragged telcos to court, where it found out quickly that it had overreached, and that its demands would lead to insolvency. And tried to walk this back https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/companies/supreme-court-ruling-brings-vodafone-idea-closer-to-insolvency-bernstein/article31106684.ece.

The government highlighted to the court the importance of maintaining three viable private operators and maintaining services to the 300 million Vodafone Idea customers, besides the consequences, a bankruptcy would have on employment and the banking sector.

But the Supreme Court was like...um, no, I don’t care what you are saying now. I agree with what you said earlier. Vodafone Idea must pay. And pay the original amount. And it has stuck to its earlier ruling repeatedly. With more and more conviction https://www.livemint.com/industry/telecom/sc-says-no-to-another-exercise-on-agr-dues-calls-self-assessment-a-fraud-11584510170869.html.

The Supreme Court (SC) on Wednesday made it clear that there could not be another attempt at calculating the adjusted gross revenue (AGR) dues of telecom firms. Chiding the department of telecommunications (DoT) for allowing the companies to undertake self-assessment, the SC bench called the purpose of doing the numbers again a fraud on the court. It asked the DoT to withdraw the move.

"Are we fools?... Do the DoT officers think they are superior to us? Are these companies untouchable? Everyone has been trying to influence us... Newspapers are having articles after articles but we won't budge," said a bench headed by Justice Mishra.

With the understanding that ‘are we fools?’ was a rhetorical question, the government was like, okay, fine, they have to pay. But at least give them time. 

How much time? asked the court.

Um... 20 years?

ARE YOU KIDDING ME? said the court https://www.financialexpress.com/industry/agr-dues-govt-well-aware-of-implications-if-telecom-industry-is-left-without-relief-says-coai/1904721/.

A bench of Justices Arun Mishra, S A Nazeer and M R Shah refused to take up the Centre’s plea for allowing telecom companies to pay AGR dues in 20 years, saying the application will be taken up after two weeks.

“The timeframe of 20 years is unreasonable. The telecom companies have to clear all dues mentioned in the judgment,” the bench said adding that it had settled all AGR dues after hearing telecom companies and the government then had fought tooth and nail for interests and penalties.

Even the Supreme Court is reminding the government: hey this is what you wanted. We are just agreeing with you.

Demonetisation Redux

Remember when India banned 86% of its currency overnight back in 2016 and there was chaos everywhere?

Ah. Simpler times.

At the time, there was an overwhelming belief, pushed by multiple interested parties that banning cash would provide a boost to India’s digital economy, with people shifting to digital alternatives to make all their transactions.

Well, now that India is closer and closer to a shutdown, thanks to the novel coronavirus, guess what everyone is saying:

And the same interested parties are out again, making videos on Twitter.

There’s even a hashtag this time.

Fun.

Last Week in SoftBank

The dominoes are falling fast around SoftBank.

First, the VC firm is trying to raise money, not for a new Vision Fund, but to support companies in its existing Vision Fund https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-19/softbank-seeks-10-billion-to-supplement-vision-fund-amid-crisis.

SoftBank Group is seeking to raise an additional $10 billion so its first Vision Fund can support portfolio companies battered by the coronavirus pandemic, according to people with knowledge of the matter.

SoftBank is in talks with outside investors to provide $5 billion, which will be matched by a $5 billion contribution from the Japanese conglomerate, said the people, who requested anonymity because the talks are private. SoftBank may be unable to secure sufficient commitments from investors, in part because Middle Eastern sovereign wealth funds have been rocked by the steep decline in the price of oil.

At the same time, SoftBank is getting quite the treatment in the stock market https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-18/son-s-empire-wobbles-as-credit-rout-hits-softbank-s-massive-debt.

S&P cut its outlook on the group to negative late Tuesday, citing the broad market declines and the conglomerate’s plans for a share buyback. SoftBank shares plummeted 11% in Tokyo on Wednesday, the largest decline since 2012.

Indeed, its stock has plunged 38% in the last month. Its market value of 6.78 trillion yen ($63.5 billion) is now less than that of SoftBank, the domestic telecom operation that sold shares to the public last year. SoftBank Group still owns about two-thirds of the unit, which on Wednesday rose 1.4%.

“No other company in Japan is as indebted and as exposed to the economic downturn as SoftBank,” Amir Anvarzadeh, a market strategist at Asymmetric Advisors Pte. in Singapore, who is short on SoftBank, wrote in a note to clients. It seems that [CEO Masayoshi] Son’s “run of good luck has finally come to an end and his shoot-from-the-hip investment style is blowing up the group.”

Pray for SoftBank.

Because if SoftBank falls, there will be mayhem.

Answer : Identify this stock market bulwark

Did you get it?

Here is the answer, from a Mint story https://www.livemint.com/market/stock-market-news/yes-bank-surges-over-800-in-seven-sessions-11584422201675.html:

Shares of Yes Bank have surged over 1,000% in seven sessions, rising from their lifetime low, after State Bank of India along with eight lenders agreed to a bailout package for the private lender.

Rajnish Kumar, chairman of State Bank of India—the largest investor in the private sector lender—said at a press conference, SBI remains committed to the investment and will not sell any part of its stake before a three-year partial lock in period ends. The three-year lock in was part of the rescue efforts to ensure that the lender remains well capitalised.

There’s some irony in this. Every single bank stock is down, except the one that seemingly has the biggest reason to be.

Hell, even SBI, which pumped money into Yes Bank, is down, and SBI cards, its big IPO, ended in a fizzle https://www.livemint.com/news/india/sbi-cards-listing-latest-share-price-today-11584327561802.html.

What We are Listening To

I thought I’d by recommending something which we listened to at The Ken, and loved.

It’s a podcast episode titled The Case of the Missing Hit https://gimletmedia.com/shows/reply-all/o2h8bx by Reply All.

The premise is simple. Someone gets an old song stuck in his head, but when he goes to Google the lyrics he remembers, the song cannot be found anywhere. That’s where the story begins.

Perhaps you don’t listen to podcasts. Perhaps you only listen to it on your commute. Doesn’t matter. Take an hour off. Listen to it. Some are calling it the greatest https://www.esquire.com/entertainment/music/a31789727/reply-all-podcast-song-episode-the-case-of-the-missing-hit/ podcast episode https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/19/arts/reply-all-podcast.html of all time. It might be exactly what you need—to fill you with hope, to understand resilience, and to tell you that things long forgotten, suddenly, and out of nowhere, become stories we’ll never forget.

Listen. And tell me what you think.  

That’s about it from me.

These are strange times we’re living in. Hold your loved ones close. Be kind. Especially to ones who’ve lost more than us. And to those who can’t afford to stay home. We are all fighting this strange, unprecedented war in our own ways, big and small.

Oh, and wash your hands.

Regards,

Praveen Gopal Krishnan

praveen@the-ken.com

Want to unsubscribe from Nutgraf, our weekly newsletter?

Unsubscribe https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=vLlzbXZH-VQ-96Otve_dNwtnQ2GQlRsVrxyOt08MPORuDG9gjEdxpSIg7sZ0w4OF-8IcZj3x7kalZOMk01GOFRLWUf_5MSyrBEuy6xmCt3yHHzARakkBzLgJ5AS0vod3CrwZcrpb__TjRujeD9OlF1bW45b9QkzjxIBUN6hyTl91sa-l5INhUvQvg2H1rBuGTXLy7t5fpJKx6zC3X9rAUwqcEI22-Fzy6BYFJGzPa2Ct3vA2Yf2R_EERUXXnGoRxDkMDuFtoYIdFRWId8_dxnGMyBNTimgJuo11WA_tX9uDQY3mKMyFgYfEUEiyxHHO3hW2KOPEMadLno9V8GGyDMi8hE2pF2_K7iDl6SO8DkxXHxf3dR8iM7dkiI5GRFGwUOR_I5GrMVOU-j5V08bjPVGZPJNhB9v_m3oPiLuw1mrXqX1Z7sVNAe1DAAKTJy4e3-z0kbzkosuLohtY3OqgLJ-qSh-WhCAgCv_xmhwB11SAcOjuqFa36i5WIfTQlLNfvh8AfM9iaNa5cUMBUKqNU78nW94rbhTTLJvnxBjtvKJSQ0nMmCY1ilzUsrlRoHhLM - Unsubscribe Preferences https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=C44FdcKCcPQv-7kbBG90LOYB2uMcsjICcvCG2OYbUSWOCP_lUT5UcCS4Umq6QVWHyT8YJgKfyfwPmPPo4xkmbRpe9s-lXfae5YA_gs5NnT6-6QdgygWhfNMAC2-jfTZtTgx6Gv89-IfSlH2WA-XXAHPo7OlLh8yE5nqmUO7wKncU94QZhXHGPL6HVx5wesxZycZvywy4lO9SjCdObnLH1G5KoD3SJBBiddM6WRCOlepBVubYItBGAT61fU6G3LCJDwqJrMipvfxzXJWP0JupqYlBRrFmW4s79rpzwX94HnQKddvOwVjbzB93EaGcikuWWbcsT72KVeear-XSS9dfUYvAXPFHHZlbOquzQSsHoWSeM1kn8nNC9pkMoQYFgO4tXRUbFlnkuuMsiJycCrwkZzU8USgRnke4CUUY67lKgS0BRSNXfjVrSU1A3EptLcvvN_ci3AQq8MSDEs1iA2ttnHPMZQauv2fFRZdjCT89ywFDl2qArPtpp92ghw2U2sjrk6pgHUJL8CxP6mZcz-CfjHmyl2_Z3NV1aXLIyzwBZEI=