View this post on the web at https://whyisthisinteresting.substack.com/p/the-monday-media-diet-with-molly-6e4

Molly Jensen (MJ) runs Afripods based out of Nairobi. Pleased to have her with us this week. -Colin (CJN) 
Tell us about yourself.
For the last five years, I have been running a podcasting hosting platform called Afripods out of Nairobi, Kenya that serves the African continent. We work to help African creators get analytics, take up space and eventually use that information to get paid for their content. I find the work I do to be not just a privilege but a real responsibility and I am grateful to be able to do it. Previously (and many years ago), I used to be a competitive athlete and was recruited to play soccer as a Goalkeeper at a Division I school. That said, I am extremely excited for the World Cup to be back and to have so many African teams represented in this edition!!
Describe your media diet.
I get information all over the internet. I don’t want to say I’m chronically online, but I’m definitely chronically online. I like to know what’s going on and I like to keep tabs on as much breaking news and social news as possible. I’ve found that it makes it easier to relate to people when you care about the same things as them and also are tapped into local issues. Additionally, with culture and new media, it is important (in my opinion!) to be online and to be aware in general. I think with as quickly as news breaks, and as short as everyones attention span is, we have never been more inundated with information, misinformation and content. Discernment is more important than its ever been. But to answer your question, usually from different substacks, to podcasts, to social media like TikTok as well as on my Twitter/X timeline. I used to really like reading The New Yorker online and sometimes would read bits of the NY Times whether it was Modern Love or checking out articles from Wirecutter. I get some newsletters for work including PodNews and the Creative Brief as well as a few others. I love Doug Shapiro’s The Mediator and David Adeleke’s Communique-- both of them have excellent takes on the state of the creative economy. Both Sara Wilson (Community Catalysts) and Abby Ho (Fellow Kids) have excellent newsletters as well. I recently have started spending quite a bit of time on Reddit or referencing it for reviews.
To shout out some excellent African podcasts, I’d give a true variety. Case Number Zero by Nation Media is an excellent investigative journalism podcast that has all the makings to be a Serial out of Africa, Sincerely Accra for some easy banter and conversation, as well as It’s Related I Promise.
What’s the last great book you read?
I really like fiction and using my imagination when I’m reading. It helps me relax and makes me feel truly entertained. When I’m reading a good fiction book, I can get through it in a few days. That said, I enjoyed reading The Seven Husbands of Evelyn Hugo and I also reread Children of Blood and Bone.
What are you reading now?
I actually need to go to the library and pick up something new! I was gifted a few books over the holidays but hadn’t brought them on my most recent flights. I think I actually want to read 8 Dates by the Gottmans as I am getting married this summer.
If I can add what I am listening to right now, it is the new season of The Honest Bunch podcast and regularly sprinkling in some Diary of a CEO.
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication?
Depending on what it is, I am a pretty quick reader so I tend to do a full skim before going back and slowly reading what stuck out to me. Usually I like to be cozy and comfortable when I’m getting ready to read something -- regardless of what it is-- so I will be on a couch, in a comfy chair or lying in bed.
Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
Everyone really should be reading fiction books. I know for some it can feel frivalous but I read somewhere that people who read fiction tend to be better at problem solving and have more active imaginatiosn which has been my argument for why I would prefer to spend so much time wth a good story!
I’d highly suggest everyone reads all three of Tomi Adeyemi’s books.
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
I think probably Tabata timer. It helps me with my workouts and is essentially just a timer but I like how it works compared to others. For famous, we’d have to have a serious tie breaker between my Whoop app and Tiktok.
Plane or train?
Both. Depends on the distance to be honest. I grew up in New York and travel quite a bit between NY and DC area so the Amtrak NE Regional line is excellent in connectivity for that. Most of my work travel is on a plane and generally across the continent I have flown a lot of Kenya Airways. For intercontinental travel, and given the chance to have business class lie flat seats, I’d specifically choose that on a middle eastern flight carrier.
What is one place everyone should visit?
I tell people that Lamu was the first place in the world I actually felt relaxed, so I’d say that. It can be difficult to get there as you can only access it from within Kenya, but it is such a special island. For a long time they only had donkeys as transport as there are no cars on island, but as the port has been built up they have added boda transport (motorbikes). There are so many beautiful pockets of Africa, and I feel so lucky to have experienced some of the continent. I am endlessly inspired by each country I visit and cannot wait to go to whatever new place is in my future.
Another place I would recommend is Portland, Jamaica. You drive from Kingston through the Blue Mountains and get to a true paradise on the island. If Negril, Montego Bay and Ocho Rios are for tourists, then Portland is for Jamacians. It is truly special.
As a last one, the Nicoya peninsula in Costa Rica is incredible. Specifically Manzanillo. I went with a friend and flew into Liberia and went on an incredible driving tour of Costa Rica. We drove from Liberia to Nicyoya, to the Arenal Volcano and through some of the rainforest.
Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into.
I’ve been deep into this big carrot conspiracy lately. DId you know that most carrots have been sitting in warehouses for 6-12 months before we get them in stores? I have some health issues so I’m usually falling deep into some wellness-health-longevity-crunchy hole of the internet. I don’t suscribe to all of it, but there is definitely some truth to some of it. There’s also plenty of political rabbit holes to fall into right now between the US government & Iran, and Palestine and Israel. (MJ)

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93aHlpc3RoaXNpbnRlcmVzdGluZy5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vYWN0aW9uL2Rpc2FibGVfZW1haWw_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveE5EVTJNek14T1N3aWNHOXpkRjlwWkNJNk1UazBOamcyT0RVNExDSnBZWFFpT2pFM056WTJPREF4TmpBc0ltVjRjQ0k2TVRnd09ESXhOakUyTUN3aWFYTnpJam9pY0hWaUxUY3dNREFpTENKemRXSWlPaUprYVhOaFlteGxYMlZ0WVdsc0luMC5LUDV3eVkwNUg4SmNhcExYd3V0aWZJUXVIa3lGcGFCMkpTVTR1YzdzcFhJIiwicCI6MTk0Njg2ODU4LCJzIjo3MDAwLCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzc2NjgwMTYwLCJleHAiOjIwOTIyNTYxNjAsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.uI41BrRqTfov4mphvkks8SPHzrU28gpEsKRatxF6Bik?