View this post on the web at https://riverkenna.substack.com/p/mantra-an-irresponsible-amateurish

When I say I’m going to write about mantras, people tend to hear a couple different things, and either start to groan or cheer depending on which thing they think I’m talking about. So first I want to clarify a few things that fall very loosely under this umbrella, and how I view each of them. Then I’m going to give a practice guide for each one — though only one of those will be particularly long. That’s the one I’m really trying to talk about, the rest are interesting, but kind of just along for the ride.
Hopefully, even if you don’t buy in to the main type of mantras I’m here to talk about, you’ll at least get some good practice notes or musings out of the larger discussion. This is going to be a bit of a walk, a bit of an amble and a bit of a ramble — don’t take anything too seriously or expect me to either, okay?
Okay, let’s go
Thanks for reading In•Star! Subscribe for free to receive new posts and support my work.
Whatcha Mean Mantra?
There are 2 basic things that people hear when I say mantra, and then 2 more minor ones that feel important to mention because I don’t actually hear most people mention them (thanks to Emergent Vibe [ https://substack.com/redirect/8c7fa83f-afd0-4df8-a800-81811f429066?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] for the convos that connected them for me). All of these could be called “mantras,” but I’m going to use my own naming system for them to lessen confusion.
Mantras: The thing that I refer to as a mantra (the main subject of this chat) is the one that the word mantra originally existed to describe: ancient phrases, syllables, songs, etc that have long been used for spiritual purposes in many languages and cultures, but mostly in Sanskrit. Examples: Om Namah Shivaya, Om Mani Padme Hum, etc.
Affirmations: This is what I call the type of “mantra” where it’s a word or phrase in a language you know, meant to help guide your actions and decisions. Examples: “You Only Live Once,” “This Too Shall Pass,” “Progress, Not Perfection,” etc.
Pulls: Hard to find a good name for this one, and not everyone has experienced it — but sometimes an insight will spring up in your body, and a phrase attaches to that insight. Your system seems to automatically repeat and repeat and repeat that phrase as a way of PUSHING and/or PULLING the insight into your whole being. To me, it feels like a strong energetic crank trying to dissolve and re-pattern something inside me. What it shares in common with the others is that it involves Effective Language repeating inside you again and again. Examples: I’ll get to that below; this is less familiar and will take some space.
Found Pulls: Kind of the reverse of the above. While a “Pull” can originate with a sensation in the body, then become words that help move that energetic sensation more deeply in the body — a “Found Pull” is when words come from outside of you but have a similar effect in you. Example: I’ll give more below, but maybe you’ve had someone say a short phrase to you before, and you immediately felt it light up your body, or shift something inside you? You couldn’t get it out of your head for weeks, and every time it repeated, it felt like some tectonic plate was shifting in your nervous system?
Okay, those are the main types. I’m mostly concerned with number one, and am mostly trying to say some stuff about that. But the others also feel important, and this is as good a place as any to dig into them.
1. Mantras (This Article Exists Cuz I Wanted to Share This Section, Really)
First and foremost: I am a dumb lil weirdo with highly idiosyncratic tendencies in the spiritual realm. I’ve got a lot of experience with a lot of stuff, but all of it is what works for me. I have been shocked semi-often (just last night, in one case!) when talking to other practitioners about things that do or don’t work for them, capabilities that are or aren’t online for them. None of this is one-size-fits-all. I’m just providing some notes on things that seem to be working for me.
Mantra practice is a long and storied tradition with lots of its own rules and ideas about what direction you should face, what colors you should wear, how many repetitions of which mantras are good for which effects, on and on and on. If you want to go deep into mantra practice, go look at a bunch of that. 
If you’re already familiar, or don’t care about that and want to hear from some internet guy about things — onward we go.
So first and foremost, yes I believe mantras have power. I always assumed they were just dead ritual, repeating words over and over again for no reason, a cargo cult of some ancient insights. Then I went and practiced with a mantra-based tradition in India, and I saw, felt, and experienced a bunch of stuff that shattered those assumptions. 
So yeah, now my operating assumption is that when a culture/tradition charges a set of words with prana and sacred power for centuries or millennia… that power seems to be available to change the lives of those who chant it. And that power seems to work in non-linear and reality-bending ways.
It’s weird. I’m still uncomfortable with believing this. But it seems to keep being true, so. Here we are.
If you’re into mantras or want to try them out, here’s a few things I’ve found helpful practicing with them.
1. Say It Subtle
I learned (there are other ideas I’ve heard) that chanting mantras out loud is fine, but the least effective way to do it. Chanting them silently, with devotion, is more powerful.
While experimenting with this, I found myself leaning more and more towards a technique some of you might recognize immediately, and others might have no idea what I’m talking about: don’t say the mantra with the voice in your head — say it with your subtle body (energy body). 
You can practice this outside of mantras: try using your subtle body to say certain commands in your own language, for starters. What’s it like when the subtle energy of your body yells “STOP!” or when it whispers “come here” or “love me”? 
Take that feeling, and start bringing it to the syllables of the mantra. Say Om Namah Shivaya silently in your head, and then slowly open up your subtle body to saying it along with the voice in your head — and then let the voice in your head fade.
2. Chant Vastly
When you’ve gotten the hang of chanting the mantra with your subtle body, you can expand our more fully into the vastness of the space around you, of your aura, of the universe. If you’ve done some open awareness meditation, or anything that involves meditating on yourself as a vast being, you might be able to find this pretty easily. (If not, I have some ideas around cultivating the experience, but it’s too much to get into here. Mostly involves throwing on some catchy music and dancing wildly without moving your body — then expanding that dance out into the space around you, the city, the earth, the galaxy, etc. Then chant from that space, once you know how to get there.)
But yeah, basically let your awareness become one with the vastness of endless space, and then let the mantra chant itself from that space, emanating outward.
3. Stop Talking, Start Listening
At a certain point, there’s a flip that starts to feel possible for me, where I’ve chanted the mantra enough that I can feel myself being on its frequency (I hate that I’m using this language, but I don’t know how else to talk about it), and I can kind of just stay on that frequency for awhile without repeating the mantra. At that point, I like to switch from a frame where I’m chanting the mantra and projecting it outward, to a frame where I’m listening intently to the place in the cosmos where the mantra comes from. Where the resonant frequency of its being originates. Where the energy it connects me to is present.
I’m pretty new to mantras, and you shouldn’t take me as any kind of primary source on them. But I’ve been very surprised at how quickly I can feel some of them moving in my body, how effectively I can watch some of them move in my life. I’ve been shocked a couple times by overdosing on a given mantra, being overcome with some of the qualities associated with chanting it. I’ve had sleepless nights, too energized by chanting a mantra too many times in the day. I’ve had full-body roiling energy storms of orgasmic pleasure a couple days after starting a mantra that invokes beauty and sensuous sensitivity in the chanter.
I don’t know why these things work, and it’s a little reality-bending that they do. But I’ve kind of just accepted that they do something at this point. So I wanted to share a couple ways I’ve been playing with them.
Now on to the other 3 categories, for some very short notes.
2. Affirmations
I actually have very little to say on these. Mostly because I think everyone kind of gets them. If you can find a pithy formulation of a principle or feeling you want to live by, it helps to keep it in mind. I got a lot of mileage last year out of reminding myself to ask “where is the natural flow?” in a lot of situations. It helped me orient very quickly towards my sense of where the situation wanted to go, rather than where my ego wanted to push or force it.
I don’t think I have anything new or interesting to say about affirmations, honestly. Except maybe repeating the above point about saying mantras from your subtle body.  …I haven’t tried this, but hey, maybe try saying affirmations from your subtle body. Couldn’t hurt.
3. Pulls
Right, so first to explain these a little better maybe. Basically when there’s a somatic-energetic insight that wants to integrate in your body, sometimes you can get them to just move, and they start to pull the rest of your system into a new shape. When this happens, often that somatic-energetic sensation will have words or images land on it, and if you repeat those words or images a lot, it helps to move the insight deeper.
Michael Pollan talks about this in his book on psychedelics, I think. He has a psychedelic vision of a big creepy floating city over a natural scene. It was clear to him that this big brutish city was his ego. Later, when sober, doctors had him in a brainscan machine of some sort, and he told them he wanted to try something. He returned to the image of that city, and then made it float away into the distance. The doctors were shocked looking at his brain, the way that network activations shifted almost immediately. 
A week or so ago, I had an experience in my body accompanying an insight that’s hard to put into words, but something like: “the same way athletes bodies adapt to their specific sport, and their body will change a lot if they change sports — in that same way, your emotional body is adapted to certain ways you carry yourself, ways you’ve build yourself to endure pain and soldier on… but that’s all flexible, and you can just change the ‘sport’ your emotional body is playing.”
The insight hit my system really hard, mostly in the chest and solar plexus and the left side of my neck, and the words that accompanied it were “you aren’t required to be built like this.” I repeated those words over and over again internally (actually it felt more like the words repeated themselves, I didn’t have much to do with it except stay out of the way), and on each repetition, the way the insight installed itself in my chest and solar plexus and neck felt like it was cranking itself deeper and deeper, moving further into my tissue, further into the center of my body. It was an odd sensation.
…I don’t think I have much more to say about this type of experience either, except to note that it happens, and to hope I’ve helped a couple of you either to make sense of something that’s already happened to you, or to lean towards something that’s waiting in you.
4. Found Pull
Similar to the above (at least in the inner experience of your body/energy rearranging), except that the trigger comes from the outside. Rather than your system changing on its own, and then words attaching to that process — in a found pull, the words find you, and then start changing your system.
I can think of one of these that has rearranged my system and at least 3 other people I’ve shared it with, when we sat with it:
Forgiveness means giving up the hope for a better past.
Hearing that phrase and sitting with it knocked something loose in my chest. I repeated it to myself dozens of times over the next few days. I felt its signature and movement in my torso. I felt my brain breaking around it. I felt my relationship to my past rearranging around it.
A couple months ago there was a song that had this effect on me. I must have listened to it 40 or 50 times that month, because every time I heard it, I felt like it was pushing and pulling its way through my body, releasing stuck emotions and memories and patterns with every repetition. It was scraping my channels clear, and I had to repeat it over and over and over again while it did its work. Honestly it was unpleasant most of the time. But also immensely pleasurable. There was an ecstatic pain somewhere outside of time, not just hearing the song but feeling it work, tugging my body to pieces and scrubbing my emotional structures with a steel wire brush.
Hm, I’m just noticing there’s an evil twin of this — you might hear something in your youth that makes you feel worthless, insecure, broken, and then you might carry it with you and feel it move through your body every time you think of it, feel it rearranging your system into greater and greater feelings of worthlessness and brokenness.
That sucks. I’m sorry if that’s happened to you. I know there were a couple of those that haunted me for years, I hate to think any of you are with those right now. If you can find them and counteract them with anything I’ve mentioned here, or would like help doing so, feel free to get in touch. These things are always changeable. You’re not required to be built a certain way, you can always start altering how your system works.
Okay, that’s good for today. Words are wild. They do things. Go play with them. 
Also, mammals are wild and do things, and you should go play with them too. Good human mammals. Go show them some love, maybe share some good words with them.
Thanks for reading In•Star! Subscribe for free to receive new posts and support my work.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.XxwwSquQEUNC1EQWDDfd4rhDgGHVzsja4KquTtOMKXU?