View this post on the web at https://newsletter.pragmaticengineer.com/p/the-pulse-metas-self-inflicted-resignation-154

Hi, this is Gergely with a bonus, free issue of the Pragmatic Engineer Newsletter. In every issue, I cover Big Tech and startups through the lens of senior engineers and engineering leaders. Today, we cover one out of four topics from last week’s The Pulse [ https://substack.com/redirect/06ad5550-bc9f-499b-9d3e-fa1f7e65cfd3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] issue. Full subscribers received the article below seven days ago. If you’ve been forwarded this email, you can subscribe here [ https://substack.com/redirect/aca71d2b-2d07-4934-a51b-ba679bfe6bf3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
Two months ago, I covered [ https://substack.com/redirect/dd41783f-5110-407e-80c1-5a4be290800b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] how Meta seemingly deliberately started destroying its once-standout engineering organization. The company did 10% layoffs at a time when revenue and profits hit an all-time high, and reassigned about 20-30% of software engineers to data labeling with basically no notice.
The result was that a good chunk of software engineers at Meta – even those not reassigned – were starting to interview elsewhere:
I said – and still maintain – that the layoffs were an unforced, self-inflicted error on Meta’s part. Coupled with forced reassignment, they struck disaster. And I’ve now gathered new details that confirm that Meta is bleeding top engineering and product management talent:
Some layoffs reversed, in the 11th hour
In the UK, mass layoffs require a notification to those potentially affected, before the cuts can happen. A few weeks after this notification, a good chunk of folks were “un-notified,” I confirmed. But those on notice had already started to look for jobs, obviously.
Retainer equity grants offered to IC6+ engineers resigning
Meta started to offer large retainer equity grants to those resigning and leaving for Google, Anthropic, and OpenAI: a practice not done before. Talking with long-time Meta engineers, Meta simply didn’t make counteroffers or negotiate when an engineer handed in their resignation. But this practice has been abandoned. Here’s a story of a senior, long-tenured engineer I confirmed to have happened:
This dev was force-reassigned to one of the AI data labeling teams
They thought “oh no, this is not what I want to do” and started to interview
Got a Google offer, but compensation was below their current one. Google basically lowballed them.
Decided to leave anyway. Told their new manager they were resigning.
New manager asked for some time, then presented a large, one-off, retainer equity grant, vesting over 3 years
The engineer went back to Google, telling the company, unfortunately, they are a key engineer and showed them the retainer amount Meta is paying for them to stay
Google upped their offer, out-bidding Meta’s retainer offer
The engineer who was desperate to leave – even for lower compensation! – was thrilled, and happily left for Google.
Retainer equity seems to be offered for most IC6 engineers who resigned in the last few weeks. I talked with seven such people, who were all IC6 (staff-level engineer) and IC7 (principal-level engineers), who shared more details. They are not aware of IC4 (mid-level engineer) or IC5 (senior-level engineers) getting such offers.
Retainer equity offered is $400K to $1M+, and vests over 3 years, for the folks who got these offers. The $1M+ offers were all for engineers with Anthropic or OpenAI offers, and I confirmed a $400K and a $600K grant for engineers with an offer for other, smaller AI startups.
A current Meta engineer who is interviewing asked me if these folks needed to present their offer letter to get a counteroffer. I asked two of these folks with counteroffers, and neither had to do so, but they both indicated they were handing in their resignation. Upon receiving this notification, their director, together with HR, offered a discretionary retainer equity, should they stay.
Anthropic and OpenAI on a hiring spree from Meta
Anthropic and OpenAI seem to be on a hiring spree, signing Meta engineers that Meta wants to retain now that it is too late! I have confirmed that three engineers who received an offer from Anthropic were also offered large, $1M+ equity grants (vesting over 4 years) as counter-offers to stay. Two out of the three rejected it and joined Anthropic, and the third one initially accepted the offer and then still left for Anthropic a month later, forfeiting this grant.
OpenAI is having similar success, and the two AI labs seem to be the main destination for now ex-Meta engineers to bounce to. It makes sense: these companies can match Meta’s total compensation, and although neither OpenAI nor Anthropic is publicly traded, both companies organize secondary equity sales, and their respective IPOs are likely to happen in 3-12 months’ time.
AI startups also successful in hiring infra experts from Meta
I had an in-depth discussion with another long-tenured AI infra engineer at Meta, who was considering whether to stay, or to go. This person wrote up their situation, and shared it with me, writing:
“With the current situation at Meta (layoffs, forced drafting to do AI work, general sense of disruption at work, low moarale, and almost zero productivity across teams, plus multiple reorgs) I started to look around, on the market, a few weeks before the 20 May layoffs. I figured I have a 50% chance of being let go.
I did not get laid off, but I got offers from startups, and one from a high-growth AI startup I like, and also an offer from Google.
Now, the pros to staying a Meta:
Context, relationships
Scale that few others have
Big Tech perks, relatively “chill” WLB in terms of oncall
High TC
The cons:
Terrible morale, hard to “move” work through mostly unmotivated teams all around me
Re-orgs continue, I have very low confidence in middle management (Directors, VPs) to navigate this churn
Further layoffs are likely: it’s clear that there’s more bloat, surely Zuck will do another round in 2027. And no one is safe during a layoff
A ‘doom loop’ for anyone who stays: low morale → unmoitivated bith highly compensated engineers → a bloated organization that moves slow”
After a new reorg, this engineer got a supportive manager, who made it clear they would help them thrive inside of Meta. So the engineer rejected both the AI startup’s offer and that of Google, deciding to stay… but only for a month!
The AI startup’s founder spent more time with this engineer, increased the equity in the package significantly, and convinced this engineer that at the startup they matter as a person, while at Meta they would be doing soulless work, worrying about the next layoff, probably early 2027.
So this engineer also handed in their resignation. And it all started with the layoffs: the engineer assumed there was a 50% chance of being let go and wanted more career stability!
Those deciding to not resign: stay for the money?
There are engineers staying – at least until the end of the year, to wait for the stock refershers — which we’ll talk about in just a moment.
Another engineer I talked to decided to quit Meta with morale so low, and start his own thing. Management convinced him to stay until the end of the year, hinting at large equity refreshers being handed out around January, which could be in the $1M+ range for this specific engineer.
The 2022 stock price causing a TC decrease for many?
One reason there’s speculation about large equity refreshers being handed out at the end of the year is that Meta’s stock price was very low in 2022 and 2023, when equity refreshers and new hire grants were handed out. In both March 2022 and March 2023, the stock price was around $200 - which is about a third of this year’s stock price (which has been fluctuating between $520- 680, currently sitting at $540.) By March 2024, the stock price rose to $500, and then to $580 in March 2025.
Because of this, those who joined Meta in 2022 have seen their equity grants nearly triple, and the 2023 equity is worth nearly 3x as well. But for these lucky folks, total compensation is set to drop by the end of this year, and their equity refresher would need to be higher than in past years to avoid a compensation drop.
Inside of Meta, engineers who I talked to are split between expecting further attrition (those leaving whose total compensation drops steeply) and those who think that there will be more attrition unless there are higher-than-usual equity refreshers.
A “mercenary” culture at Meta?
I wonder if Meta made a massive mistake by treating engineers as “commodities” and turning their culture into a “mercenary” one. Between March and June, Meta treated engineers as replaceable commodities that could be thrown out or moved between teams, while stripping them of any autonomy. The reassignments to AI labeling were not explained, nor were managers or individuals asked about preferences: from above, someone said that Alice and Bob, starting on Monday, are no longer with the team, but are training up Meta AI. Never mind that these were the two most experienced engineers on the team, or that Bob was the team’s infra expert, and Alice the “fixer” engineer on the team.
And all this damage was done, for what? It was to allow Meta to restart its AI coding model development efforts, and release Meta Muse Spark [ https://substack.com/redirect/3824f1cf-81c6-4790-ba00-78dd192dd711?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: an AI model that is currently the 7th most capable [ https://substack.com/redirect/41838a4c-4874-4a58-9ecb-d83bb774d0d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] AI model as per Artificial Intelligence Analysis, tied with Grok 4.5. Credit where it’s due: with this model, Meta is now well ahead of Google’s Gemini in capability.
With the damage done, there is little motivation for anyone to stay at Meta – unless they are on a visa, or if it’s about the money. You can have an OK engineering culture with a team who is mostly interested in making more money than what they would elsewhere: but this is more of a mercenary culture, and companies run by mercenaries are more easily out-executed by teams where people believe in the mission of the company.
If you work at a company that would love to hire from Meta: now is (still) your opening! So go for it.
And if you’re at Meta: you are so in-demand, outside of the company, at places where engineering is still treated as a profit center. As Ryan Nystrom, currently building AI at Notion, put it: [ https://substack.com/redirect/715ec05f-cae6-4fce-acc5-208f118301f5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
“Meta friends: the industry is exhilarating right now. Get out. Go build something. The handcuffs are an illusion.
I’m having the time of my life at Notion. Come, and have fun again.”
Read the full issue of last week’s The Pulse [ https://substack.com/redirect/06ad5550-bc9f-499b-9d3e-fa1f7e65cfd3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], or check out this week’s The Pulse [ https://substack.com/redirect/4d845e0b-98e6-4a03-95ed-f2a17b85f86f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. This week’s issue covers:
More on the “great engineering leader career break.” The industry is changing fast, and the VPE and CTO roles also need to adapt. And don’t forget that these are the roles from which you can drive change that reorganizes engineering in ways that work better.
We need to talk about migrations with AI. Asana needed to migrate off testing framework Enzyme, but it meant doing a massive rewrite of test cases. With AI, the project was completed in two weeks: without AI, this work would surely have been kicked down the road. Airbnb and Uber share similar stories, and AI seems like a superb fit for framework migrations.
Are AI startups making the Gartner Magic Quadrant irrelevant? Gartner ranked AWS, Microsoft and IBM above Anthropic, Cursor and OpenAI in their “AI code modernization tools” ranking. This is most likely because the first three pay large sums of money to Gartner, but AI labs and vendors refuse to pay this “Gartner tax.”
Industry Pulse. Another hours-long GitHub outage, GitHub alternatives are here and fighting for market share, Slack launches Slack Code, text generated by Claude to be watermarked, and Uber open sources SubmitQueue.
Read the full The Pulse. [ https://substack.com/redirect/4d845e0b-98e6-4a03-95ed-f2a17b85f86f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.otHnBWN29flNSzn0K0ElXBDwYxF4WkbCNVBcAxQBkFw?