View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/the-planets-personified

As an avid reader of science fiction and nonfiction authors like Carl Sagan, I was more excited for astronomy class than any other science offering at my high school. I felt ready to feel awe at the mysteries of the universe and perhaps even unlock its secrets.
This class was unique because, a few times over the course of the semester, we had to come to school at night and perform observations through fancy-looking telescopes that belonged to the school. I’d never used a telescope that wasn’t a children’s toy before. I suppose I should have known better, but I really expected to see some amazing things through that eyepiece. 
Unfortunately, the whole experience was a bit of a dud. We got a great view of the moon, but when we trained our telescopes on the planets, we saw, well, some dots that were slightly bigger than the dots we could see with our naked eyes. 
It was all quite underwhelming, and I had a hard time convincing myself that these (thanks to the telescope, slightly larger) dots were entire planets, some larger than ours, millions of miles away. Though I retained some interest in space, I was never much interested in looking up into the sky after that; I stuck to the close-up pictures that came back from spacecraft. 
Imagine being a person in the ancient or medieval world, looking up at the planets in the sky. You’d have no magnification or sense of what these places were; you’d just track tiny dots as they moved across the sky and identify them as Venus and Mars and so on. 
But medieval people must have had much richer imaginations than I did. While I looked up at the planets, saw some dots of light, and shrugged, they gave the planets personalities, symbolism, and even families. Medieval artists created a whole genre of art attempting to give meaning to those tiny dots in the darkness. 
Imagine the satisfaction you would feel if you signed up as a paid subscriber… (or the smaller but still significant amount of satisfaction you’d get from a free subscription)
Medieval people thought there were seven planets — the five planets they could see (Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn) and the two other big objects in the sky (the Sun and Moon). And despite their distance, they often drew them.
Sometimes, artists depicted the planets as stars or dots, as they did in this image showing the transit of Prudentia (one of the core virtues) through the heavens and up to the pearly gates:
But medieval artists often gave the planets a little personality. In this 11th-century manuscript, the planets seem to be just circles until you look closer to see a little head inside each one:
In this 9th-century illustration, too, we see the planets as circles with a figure inside:
These figures usually represented the Greco-Roman gods after which the planets were named, and they’re often accompanied by symbols from the Zodiac. You might think  that pagan gods and astrology would be forbidden in a medieval Europe dominated by the Catholic Church. Though the early church took a strong stand against astrology, later Christians reframed the planets as instruments of God’s will; therefore, studying them was permitted or even encouraged. 
Over time, medieval Christians used ancient myth and celestial observations to create personalities for each planet. They often depicted the planets not as discs in the sky but as figures with personalities. Here we see five planets as heads with personalities in a manuscript from the 1000s:
And this one, from the 1480s, shows the various planets traversing the sky as if on tightropes. Mars is in armor, Venus is a nude woman, and so on:
A wonderful German manuscript from the 1400s shows the planets as fully-fledged characters. Here’s Mars as, unsurprisingly, a knight:
Mercury is a doctor (likely because he was associated with the caduceus, which was also linked with health):
Venus got to ride a stag:
And the sun was an emperor carrying a symbol of Christ’s dominion over the world:
Other depictions were linked more directly to myth. Woodcut makers in the 16th century loved to make little collections of the seven planets. Here we have a collection of planets — Saturn as an amputee because of his connection with mortality, Mars and Jupiter as well-armed rulers, and the sun as a blinding light:
And here we see Venus, Luna, and Mercury:
Mars is, well, a little cheeky in this one:
Did you know the planets had children? Medieval artists often created images of “the planets and their children,” which showed people whose lives were affected by a planet’s supposed attributes as the “children” of that planet. 
So here we see Venus moving across the sky above her children, who are all falling in love thanks to her influence:
Mercury’s children are hard at work in mathematics and the arts:
And Jupiter oversees the powerful:
Here’s a charming collection of all seven planets, dated to 1543:
 I love what a mashup the image above is — ancient Roman gods dressed in medieval clothing next to astrological signs. Ironically, this image just happened to be created in the year that Copernicus published De Revolutionibus, the work whose conclusions would eventually upend humanity’s understanding of the heavens. The idea of planets as mythological figures traversing the sky would soon come to an end. 
By 1543, what people would later call the Renaissance was well underway, giving birth to an age of more rigorous scientific inquiry. But medieval images of the planets show that, even before the Renaissance, people were trying to make sense of the heavens, and that the ideas of antiquity were never very far from hand. They also show how badly people have always wanted to see what was happening on those tiny dots of light in the sky, even if only in their imaginations. 
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
You can share the newsletter with others:
You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.2aJ8EgvMDAU5CEwD5TsPoEkXblmwNDqJW9kuBsLnRGw?