View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/how-a-machine-became-a-metaphor

For the last installment of our series on the art and material culture of the French Revolution, I wanted to look at depictions of the machine that has come to define it in so many ways — the guillotine. Hope you like it!
As always, you should subscribe — and if you enjoy these posts, you should consider becoming a paid subscriber!
 
Nicolas Jacques Pelletier would almost certainly be lost to history if he had died another way. It seems like he was a common criminal. It’s not even totally clear what his transgressions were, but robbery and assault are a good bet. He was convicted of his crimes on New Year’s Eve, 1791. The sentence was death.
But what kind of death? Capital punishment was common in early modern France, and executions were always carried out in public. An execution was considered by many to be an enjoyable afternoon out, as you can see in this 1720 engraving from the Netherlands:
But the specific fate of a condemned criminal depended on his or her status. Most often, criminals would be hanged. If the offender was of noble birth, they were entitled to decapitation, which was supposed to involve less suffering as long as the executioner knew what he was doing. 
Some particularly heinous crimes resulted in particularly horrific deaths [ https://substack.com/redirect/47a1dc28-0ab4-4059-8940-24a7f045579f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. Very occasionally, a heretic might be burned, while a vicious murderer might be broken on the wheel. This practice involved binding the victim to the floor or a wagon wheel and breaking his bones, one by one, with a sword or another wheel. The executioner then would, in the end, hang the criminal from the wheel, possibly by threading his shattered limbs through the spokes. If the victim was not already dead, he’d be executed then, but his body would remain hanging there for the animals to pick at. 
You can get a sense of the capriciousness and cruelty of the early modern legal system in this 1589 woodcut of the death Peter Stumpp, a German who was found guilty of being a werewolf(!):
But luckily, Nicolas Jacques Pelletier lived in an enlightened age. The French Revolution had taken hold, and he would be the first man to lose his life to the guillotine. 
Pelletier was taken to the public scaffold wearing the red shirt of a murderer, in full view of the huge crowd that had gathered to see this new mechanism of death. The whole thing took a few quick, efficient seconds. The blade came down, and the criminal’s head plopped into a basket. The crowd filtered away, disappointed [ https://substack.com/redirect/0bc10a70-a37e-4afb-9070-72b9fdb0a4ee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] at the lack of spectacle.
The machine that killed Pelletier would go on to kill thousands more, but it was more than just a machine. The guillotine would, rightly or wrongly, come to symbolize the French Revolution — but its exact meaning remains up for grabs to this day.
The story [ https://substack.com/redirect/0bc10a70-a37e-4afb-9070-72b9fdb0a4ee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] goes that, in 1789, Dr. Joseph-Ignace Guillotin proposed a new method of execution to the new French National Assembly, one that would reflect the principles of reason and equality that dominated the discourse. It was no longer appropriate to kill criminals of different classes in different ways, and executioners should try to make deaths quick and painless. The days of horrific, pointless torture were over.
It was decided that decapitation was the most efficient way to end a life, but executioners complained that beheading someone with a sword was an unpredictable and potentially messy endeavor. The process needed to be systematized, so Guillotin — who was actually opposed to the death penalty but reasoned that, if he couldn’t abolish it, he should work to minimize its cruelty — proposed a beheading machine. 
There’s a bit more to the history of the device, though, which complicates this Guillotin-centric story. 
The actual device used in France was designed by a Dr. Antoine Louis; at first people called it, perhaps more accurately, a “louisette.” He tested it on corpses from the morgue and live animals until he was satisfied that the machine would do the job.
Louis based his design on beheading machines very similar to the guillotine, which had existed for some time. There was the Halifax Gibbet, for example, which had been used in Britain for centuries:
And this machine in a 1512 print of the execution of St. Matthew by Lucas Cranach the Elder:
So Guillotin, whose name will forever be associated with machines like this, didn’t invent them — he merely came up with the idea of making them more efficient, which is to say more reliably deadly. He inspired others to introduce a diagonally sloped blade and spend a lot of time figuring out the most effective heights and weights. 
Then they painted his machine red and sent it out to end Pelletier’s life. 
What did the guillotine represent? To some, it was merely an efficient machine, able to dispense justice more quickly and humanely than had been previously possible (if things were running smoothly, Paris’s executioners could kill about one person every minute [ https://substack.com/redirect/0bc10a70-a37e-4afb-9070-72b9fdb0a4ee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]). The guillotine was sometimes depicted this way, like any other kind of machine:
In some cases, it was an instrument of the people’s justice, a levelling machine, surrounded by symbols of the revolution, as in this illustration of the execution of Louis XVI:
And this one, which shows the celebrations at the death of Maximilien Robespierre:
You’ll notice that the victims of the guillotine are relatively anonymous in the images above; they’re hard to even see in some cases. But in other depictions, the human drama takes center stage. Artists seem captivated by the last moments of Louis XVI:
The same goes for the Girondist Madame Roland, who was said to exclaim in her last moments, "Oh freedom, what crimes are committed in your name!"
Or Robespierre, who seems here not to want to go quietly:
Other art emphasizes the bloodshed. In this drawing by the anti-revolutionary cartoonist James Gillray, the guillotine is not a clean instrument of mercy but a cruel, disgusting machine:
And this French image emphasizes the gore:
In some depictions, it’s an instrument of chaos instead of order, as in The Triumph of the Guillotine by Nicolas-Antoine Taunay:
Or something that produces madness. Here the priest-turned-revolutionary Joseph Le Bon drinks the blood of the executed before he himself is killed:
The guillotine took on religious overtones, and rarely good ones. In this English cartoon, it is the machine that causes hell to break loose:
While in this image the French General Lazare Hoche ascends into “heaven” by playing a guillotine like a lyre while France burns below.
The guillotine became a part of the iconography of the revolution, both as it was happening (children played [ https://substack.com/redirect/0bc10a70-a37e-4afb-9070-72b9fdb0a4ee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] with little guillotines in the streets of Paris) and afterward. This mechanism of state violence was profoundly evocative of the purported values of the revolutionaries, but it also represented the limits of their imagination — it was a step too far for them to understand that maybe the fairest and most rational thing was not to kill anyone at all. 
Perhaps the guillotine is too central to our thinking about the French Revolution. After all, far more people died [ https://substack.com/redirect/bd1721b4-e62f-4a90-b11d-a828b841a457?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] during the Terror and revolutionary civil wars in less interesting ways: they were shot or stabbed or drowned as people had been for centuries. 
And the guillotine was not purely a revolutionary method of execution. It was used in a lot of other countries, many of which simply saw it as a useful tool rather than a symbol of Enlightenment values or excesses. In France, it remained in use into the 20th century, as you can see from this flyer noting the execution of the members of the Pollet Gang in 1909:
The guillotine was used in public executions in France until 1939, when Eugen Weidmann, a mass murderer, was killed. The crowd behaved [ https://substack.com/redirect/03fbc756-b9ed-403f-81f8-987a369281f1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] in such an unruly way that officials banned public executions after that. The last men to be executed by guillotine died in the 1970s; France ended its death penalty soon after that. 
Was the guillotine a symbol of Enlightenment efficiency or of bloodthirsty excess? Was it an instrument of justice or madness? Was it something new, or just another example of the ways in which governments have seen fit to take their citizens’ lives? Was it an emblem of progress or barbarism… or an example of how those two things are not always different?
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.83KAtl-ZkZxIWeqXk4SYSNbsIRTfi54G4zqUYhape70?