View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/the-long-way-around

The penultimate entry in the chokepoint series (starting here [ https://substack.com/redirect/bf74057b-7a6a-4596-b101-8a66cd8db0f1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] if you’ve missed it) is the most remote and unforgiving of them all: the Strait of Magellan. 
As always, please subscribe! And if you value the work I’ve put into this newsletter, consider becoming a paid subscriber. Your subscriptions keep this project going:
To say that Captain Pringle Stokes didn’t enjoy his trip to the southern tip of South America would be an understatement. Sent by the British Navy to chart the Strait of Magellan in 1826, he led the HMS Beagle into the cold and desolate waters between Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego. The Beagle rescued some shipwrecked men from another British vessel and encountered a few native people, but it was mostly a lonely journey through confusing waterways. The ship was often enveloped by fog so thick that it was difficult to see anything, and the men shivered through blinding snowstorms. 
Stokes felt trapped at the end of the world. He wrote [ https://substack.com/redirect/c0c38807-30a8-4b26-8224-ba5ec5b69c63?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] in 1828 that
Nothing could be more dreary than the scene around us. The lofty, bleak, and barren heights that surround the inhospitable shores of this inlet, were covered, even low down their sides, with dense clouds, upon which the fierce squalls that assailed us beat, without causing any change… Around us, and some of them distant no more than two-thirds of a cable’s length, were rocky inlets, lashed by a tremendous surf; and, as if to complete the dreariness and utter desolation of the scene, even the birds seemed to shun its neighbourhood. The weather was that in which… ‘the soul of man dies in him.’
He wasn’t just being dramatic. Stokes sank into a terrible depression. He locked himself in his cabin for a month. Then he shot himself in the head. His suicide attempt was not immediately successful; Stokes lingered for almost two more weeks before gangrene killed him.
Stokes, who had been a promising leader in the Navy, was certainly not the first person whose life was claimed by the Strait of Magellan, one of the world’s most unforgiving chokepoints, and he would not be the last. 
What happened after Stokes died was in many ways even stranger. A new officer, Robert FitzRoy, took command of the Beagle. He was 23 years old, a skilled navigator and an unpredictable personality. As the Beagle picked its way through the tricky waters, it encountered more local people, whom the British called “Fuegians.” Some of them stole a small boat from the British; FitzRoy ordered some Fuegians taken hostage in retaliation. In the end, he kidnapped four people (he called them “savages [ https://substack.com/redirect/b5bd9b14-6acf-4e95-bda0-51a126e12224?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]”) — two men, a teenage boy, and a nine-year-old girl — and took them back to England. He planned to convert them to Christianity and then return them to their homeland as “civilizers” and missionaries. Here’s a drawing of three of them, whose names were Yokcushlu, Orundellico, and Elleparu.
FitzRoy renamed them Fuegia Basket, Jemmy Button, and York Minster (the fourth captive, Boat Memory — his original name is unknown — caught smallpox and died soon after arriving in England). Jemmy Button’s name came from the mother-of-pearl button that the British gave his mother as an exchange for him. 
The Fuegians spent about ten months in a British elementary school. FitzRoy brought them to an audience with the King. Orundellico (Jemmy Button), in particular, became a bit of a celebrity for the way he took to fancy European clothing. It all seemed to be going well, until FitzRoy learned that Elleparu (York Minster), an adult being forced to go to elementary school, was sleeping with the underage Yokcushlu (Fuegia Basket). FitzRoy pulled them out of school and beseeched [ https://substack.com/redirect/51cfd317-95c3-4ccd-85f5-922aef95754b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] his commanders to put him in charge of a new voyage to South America. 
His wish was granted; the Beagle would set out again toward the Strait of Magellan as part of a larger journey that would eventually circle the globe. FitzRoy, worried that his tendency toward melancholy might get the best of him on the long, lonely expedition, invited a young would-be clergyman along as his companion. Charles Darwin accepted, and the voyage would shape scientific history. 
As you might have expected, the return of the three Fuegian “missionaries” did not go as planned. The local Yamana people distrusted them and robbed them of the supplies that the British left with them. On its way back, the Beagle encountered Orundellico (Jemmy Button) again. Darwin writes [ https://substack.com/redirect/b5bd9b14-6acf-4e95-bda0-51a126e12224?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that
This man was poor Jemmy,—now a thin, haggard savage, with long disordered hair, and naked, except a bit of blanket round his waist. We did not recognize him till he was close to us, for he was ashamed of himself, and turned his back to the ship. We had left him plump, fat, clean, and well-dressed;—I never saw so complete and grievous a change…
Despite Darwin’s impression of his new life, Orundellico/Jemmy rejected an offer to return to England with the Beagle:
Every soul on board was heartily sorry to shake hands with him for the last time. I do not now doubt that he will be as happy as, perhaps happier than, if he had never left his own country. Every one must sincerely hope that Captain Fitz Roy’s noble hope may be fulfilled, of being rewarded for the many generous sacrifices which he made for these Fuegians, by some shipwrecked sailor being protected by the descendants of Jemmy Button and his tribe! When Jemmy reached the shore, he lighted a signal fire, and the smoke curled up, bidding us a last and long farewell, as the ship stood on her course into the open sea.
We’ve been looking at chokepoints lately, and the Strait of Magellan certainly is one. But it’s different from places like the Strait of Hormuz. The southern end of South America was a place that was as much about surviving incredibly harsh conditions as it was about controlling trade and military movement. And, as we’ve seen, Europeans’ struggle for survival and control in the strait affected the area’s indigenous residents.
FitzRoy wasn’t the first outsider to misunderstand the people who lived near the Strait of Magellan. Antonio Pigafetta, a Venetian who became one of the 18 men to survive Magellan’s circumnavigation of the planet, wrote in his journal of the people he encountered in 1520 at the southern end of South America:
Departing thence as far as forty nine degrees and a half in the Antarctic heavens (as we were in the winter), we entered into a port to pass the winter, and remained there two whole months without ever seeing anybody. However, one day, without anyone expecting it, we saw a giant, who was on the shore of the sea, quite naked, and was dancing and leaping, and singing, and whilst singing he put the sand and dust on his head. Our captain sent one of his men towards him, whom he charged to sing and leap like the other to reassure him, and show him friendship. This he did, and immediately the sailor led this giant to a little island where the captain was waiting for him; and when he was before us he began to be astonished, and to be afraid, and he raised one finger on high,⁠ thinking that we came from heaven. He was so tall that the tallest of us only came up to his waist;⁠ however⁠ he was well built…. This beast⁠ has its head and ears of the size of a mule, and the neck and body of the fashion of a camel, the legs of a deer, and the tail like that of a horse, and it neighs like a horse. There is a great quantity of these animals in this same place. This giant had his feet covered with the skin of this animal in the form of shoes, and he carried in his hand a short and thick bow, with a thick cord made of the gut of the said beast, with a bundle of cane arrows, which were not very long, and were feathered like ours,⁠ but they had no iron at the end, though they had at the end some small white and black cut stones, and these arrows were like those which the Turks use. The captain caused food and drink to be given to this giant, then they showed him some things, amongst others, a steel mirror. When the giant saw his likeness in it, he was greatly terrified, leaping backwards, and made three or four of our men fall down.
The supposed giants of the straits appear on this 1602 map of the straits, which claims that they are up to ten feet tall:
This 1631 map also mentions the giants (note, too, the sea monsters lurking offshore):
The strait was clearly a land of mystery, at the fringes of the known world. We can see how Europeans’ knowledge of the area improved, and how fiendishly difficult the area was to understand. The first map of the strait, from Magellan’s era, makes navigating the passage seem quite straightforward: 
It was thought for some time that there was no open ocean below South America. The strait was thought to be the only way around the Americas, as on the 1593 map: 
It was only when Francis Drake’s ship was blown off course into the seas south of Cape Horn that Europeans realized there might be a path to the south of the strait. A Dutch explorer named Willem Schouten was the first to actually traverse the Drake Passage. You’d think that this would be the end of ships methodically working their way through the harsh and confusing Strait of Magellan. 
Unfortunately, the Drake Passage was somehow even worse than the Strait of Magellan. In fact, it’s one of the most dangerous places to sail in the world. The force with which the Atlantic, Pacific, and Southern Oceans collide, the varying depths of the seafloor, the wicked winds, and the strong current running around Antarctica — not to mention the icebergs — made the Drake Passage a far worse place to sail than the strait. Navigators generally preferred getting lost in the Strait of Magellan to braving 50-foot waves and icebergs. 
So the major sea powers kept working to dominate and understand the Strait of Magellan. Their knowledge of the geography of the area became more complex:
Though maps like the one above seem quite confident in their understanding of the strait, I really like this map from 1700, showing one ship’s exploration. It gives a sense of how incomplete Europeans’ knowledge of the area really was:
It’s no wonder; this 1875 map gives a sense of the real complexity of the waters:
The Strait of Magellan was the safest way around South America, but it was by no means an easy place to be. One spot was named Port Famine (Puerto del Hambre) by British Captain Thomas Cavendish, who happened upon the ruins of a Spanish settlement there; only one survivor remained. Port Famine also happens to be the place where Beagle captain Pringle Stokes shot himself. 
Thus, Europeans who came through the strait exploited the local wildlife for food. This Dutch drawing from 1616 shows people killing the fauna along the strait:
They also attacked the local people there, who tried to keep the Dutch from hunting all of the animals on which they depended for subsistence. In retaliation, the Dutch kidnapped people:
Over time, the Strait of Magellan became better mapped and more easily traversed. The steamships of the 1800s found it easier to make their way through than sailing ships had. The newly independent nation of Chile tried to settle the area, founding the city of Punta Arenas in 1848, to which they sent prisoners, immigrants, and out-of-favor soldiers. The city became an important coaling station for ships traveling through the strait.
But this permanent settlement, the first by non-indigenous people in the area, brought predictable tragedy for the Fuegians, especially the Selk’nam people, who lived at the eastern end of the strait. Though this area might seem too remote to be of interest to the outside world, it turned out to be great for livestock grazing. So ranchers started to move in with flocks of sheep and push the native people off of their land. Selk’nam people were rounded up and incarcerated in camps:
Many died of disease; others were literally hunted down and murdered by mercenaries. Ranchers paid these murderers for each skull or pair of ears they brought back. It was, plainly put, a genocide. By 1930, only about 100 Selk’nam people were left.  The government eventually declared [ https://substack.com/redirect/5d3f8da9-7ed3-4a66-ac4d-942f72149302?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] the Selk’nam extinct, although in a recent census enough people claimed partial Selk’nam ancestry that the Chilean government has recognized them again.  Overall, only a few hundred indigenous Fuegian people live in the area anymore. 
Meanwhile, the world moved on from the Strait of Magellan. The establishment of the Panama Canal in 1914 allowed ships to bypass the difficulties of the strait. The area is now mostly traversed by sightseers and adventurers, conquered for short-term gain and then mostly forgotten, an undesired chokepoint at the end of the world.
This edition of the newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member, which gets you access to the archives and members-only posts:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.U79SuQt7lk4JyRGC2RmaOIyio2hi1qhDe8skZ3e83do?