Rs 20 lakh in cash prizes. Open to students all across India

Good afternoon, Ishan, 

Happy Independence Day!

There’s a version of this announcement that makes a somewhat laboured connection between today’s date and what we’re launching. We’ve decided to spare you that version, because the timing was more or less just a coincidence. 

So, instead we’ll jump straight to the point: the third edition of The Ken’s Case Competition launches today, with Zerodha as our title partner. Zerodha has been this competition’s partner right from the beginning, but this edition, three more incredible companies have joined us as partners, and I'll introduce them below.

This year, like the last two, we’re posing a real-world, imminent, complex question to which there are no easy solutions available, and inviting the sharpest students from India’s campuses to help us glimpse what the answers may look like.

But unlike the last two, the stakes are a lot higher, because we’re at the precipice of a shift that promises, and threatens, to change the relationship between every Indian business and its customers. Nobody knows how it’ll play out, but we do know the answers will determine which companies remake themselves, which ones get bypassed, and how Indians will change the small things they do every day. 

Hence, we’re calling this year’s edition The Great Rewiring. 

The question we’re posing is this: 

What happens when AI agents start acting for Indian consumers? Which parts of their life will these consumers hand over first, what gets built to serve them, and which companies find a place in the new world?

https://the-ken.com/case-competition-2026/

This is a hazy question to answer, because the shift is imminent and yet nobody knows what it will look like. That combination either conjures scenarios that are wildly futuristic, with no connection to what’s likely to happen, or it throws up solutions that are painfully obvious, and thus have no value.

Or sometimes, it just takes everyone astray. 

The most famous example of this took place in India 15 years ago.

When 3G arrived in 2010, most people predicted a rewiring that would create services like video calling and mobile television. In fact, India’s biggest telcos, like Airtel and Vodafone, built VAS (value-added services) businesses around that assumption. Instead, something completely unexpected happened: Whatsapp emerged to annihilate SMS, using the data layer embedded natively in 3G technology. In a few short years, telcos became pipes, and the most profitable revenue stream they owned turned to ashes. 

The reason that prediction was wrong wasn’t that it was futuristic, but that it assumed the rewiring would make phones better. Instead, the rewiring created new opportunities for a different kind of company to emerge, to solve a problem that everyone had but couldn’t articulate a solution for.

So, in this year’s edition, we designed a competition that rewards imagination while staying grounded.

First, hundreds of The Ken's readers told us all the annoying, frustrating, and repetitive parts of their daily lives, and the quirky workarounds they built to handle them. They shared vivid stories of how they currently struggle to solve problems across categories like health and fitness, money, transport, household, parenting, pets, and more. This is the foundation of the case competition—we’ll consolidate these stories into spaces and opportunities for students to design solutions. 

This survey will be open for a few more days, so if you’d like to take it and read what others said, you can do it here: https://theken.typeform.com/great-rewiring https://theken.typeform.com/great-rewiring

https://theken.typeform.com/great-rewiring

Then, student teams all across India will design and build agents that address the very problems that consumers have shared. They’ll discover a unique consumer insight around which they’ll assemble their agents. As with most consumer products, this insight is often unexpected and surprising—sometimes it's asking users to hand over something they own, like their payment history or access to their Whatsapp groups. In return, they’ll have to make the case to them for how their agent will fundamentally rewire their life and solve a deep, emotional problem they experience every day.

Finally, they’ll have to design their agent across the three rails any agent has to be built on if it’s going to work in the real world in India: a) Voice—how it talks to users, b) Payments and authorisation—what it is allowed to do, and how it pays and gets paid and c) Logistics—how it moves things in the physical world.

Which brings me to my favourite part of this year’s competition.

Three Indian companies, all at the cutting edge of building agentic rails for India, are each opening a piece of their infrastructure to teams in this competition. 

Here they are. 

Gnani [Voice partner]

Gnani is India’s frontier Voice AI company, building real-world speech across every accent,

language, and condition that production deployments demand. 

As a voice partner, they’ll open their APIs to teams building innovative, voice-first agentic solutions.

Pine Labs [Payments-and-authorisation partner]

Pine Labs is India's leading payments company and has already shipped agentic payments end-to-end. P3P is the protocol that lets an agent pay over UPI on someone's behalf; Grantex sets what that agent may spend, on whose authority, and keeps the record of what it did. 

As a payments and authorisation partner, they'll open both to teams whose agents have to move real money.

Delhivery [Logistics partner]

Delhivery is India’s largest logistics network, and has just opened test access to its Maps and MCP systems to outside developers for the first time. 

As a logistics partner, they’ll work with and support teams whose agents have to make something physically arrive.

—

Indian companies are building the rails. 

Students all across India will build what runs on them, to solve uniquely Indian problems. 

This edition is open to all full-time college students across India, regardless of discipline. There are two tracks: one for product strategy to decide what to build, and one for builders to build it. No code is required to advance, reach the finale, or win. The competition itself will run for the next two months across multiple rounds, and culminate in a live finale in October. 

The top teams will fight it out at the finale, in front of a jury of India’s leading founders, CEOs,

academics, operators, and market experts, for Rs 20 lakh in cash prizes. There are prizes for the most innovative solutions across each rail.

Finally, the best and most innovative solutions are then synthesised into The Ken's map of how

agentic AI rewires India, published in October, and read across the industry. This will be the report that companies, startups, and VCs read and reread for years to understand how the disruption plays out: what gets built, where it comes from, where consumers find new value, who wins, and who’s exposed.

If you are a student who wants to participate in the competition, or if you simply want to read the case, you can do that here:

https://the-ken.com/case-competition-2026/ https://the-ken.com/case-competition-2026/ 

I think some of the solutions will truly surprise us. 

I can’t wait to see how it all plays out. 

Regards,

Praveen Gopal Krishnan

This email was sent to ishan.mail@gmail.com 

Something wrong? Tell us at support@the-ken.com mailto:support@the-ken.com

Want to unsubscribe from our weekly newsletter, The Nutgraf? Click here https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=stMYghPOZCAiHHk8KadTWMVNeLQxP9t1g9IPcUTIrsJoMDAwdTAwMKHrKGjRzTPUtHKmvK2B3RaX7LwA-seznZBFO6rfkYTYjtPvzK9N8DtapUps2ekSYW-J83Luk-ioUESAwHFd-nWxWwOSvFQ39w3V_PxyGAxDzWAXRA_fvhBWLCky39CG_irrCCyVjSktSn_lJsSxP0NpTTlevJvOwSWxx0I3QBUN07HQFe5l-KC99PAwsxhTMun7kgfqLJgVNBRYqsEoJ6kT-RQ2MkabT0w_OJmub4xDwDDnM1rWVwL8pvuM-rD6bYulUeD4pQH7btfqZ0r8TpsTwvbXjrzkXHJ--Rr028-hjc9odNOEEXXIhXsrqX4bvEJ9QMwIOlFrdDVB1A5GbWz1o--cwnU3M-TSEAjTeKdCiDNz4KL_FuUgfbjfDEui-XAGV__gvUSuArsqXlv4SnUnvl05uhEmEwH-LsWORAOIYE9dPAUT-Kv6eBjMug5A0Ylpf--Qjkz8I1tDhCzcAxvnCix4FnEX1AlS_AKyfp2i6f9K0J1GwrQyazkkYuOx5g==Don't want to hear from us again? Unsubscribe from our emails https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=QOwQLiPHejl5fKseYhFrkELPdwHqnXgClyhX2_Quo6loMDAwdTAwMC9N-ukEmkYBSAeWUuDLvDTE0DTJqzBeqYRTZjui0LeCyDOpEEsqnWjnOMAoSxnfEo6oO2NqPswu3CJjbYCVjAA38H7eLDTqHt-d5BBFpQqo97KM_5d_mBODgVP61bnuMzDWV1zamY2iR-vjzOo23RG9lVyh_v6J8L2FRZO1ENXqHH9EaWBd8V_8DthgxIzC0DAG1bYmySv4jKcgv4U2cpyXtTvPbVbrjuR7JsouA_FvMjF_RYhep7bpNFW6XGSkSBFbZ9jMk5t4V4FByojQAq3rdlFsANv_PbE0USKedsu2WgWrqPx7YiojjgIT8BBpn6WXWJMSc324elFMgZ64s_oE17Ne1J9DJ6eVz6G5lzBmlvZMKAPu_ko-fyHlhPwsfacYNm8Bgk7NSAMZMjJWRzVyO9NnA8rycrIKlyvDlmUYAkwjjX6sZ0cSr0_uHGGvtn_CJsq-PBRnA0JRKl6aFcjMqic6H_VMyqSmrEtyWWTU

© 2026  The Ken

https://sg-mktg.com/MTc4Njc3OTczNHxxcm5rTDdWMExVQmd5REtFNlMxZWJPak00OVFUT0dQM0ltQUtaSHgyc0dLQlpsX2xJQVkzaVFja2piNVZEbk1IYUI5YTNjU2xDdVBEdTJsQTllYWw5WkZiYzhrUUt1M1Joa1FJT2NieXAxMUNmWHVQbTZWOV9VdkRYU2Z2Y0tSQ3lTZndQTEl4cy1na2tCRXVLeC04RmFtczh4N08xZzlleW9ReTEzc0Z6Ty1PUWNRTmI0ekZPTi1jTmFCNFV2WUViN2pTdENRSTMzRnhNazhCRHh5NmRVeVVaYl8zakJSS3pCMGd1QlJ3SWg1UVh2MWRXYTFBSVJFNkdlRHpzX0VifI8eCNWw8ddlDYNBF0UJVdWrtqtmi5iJ0gcUs8hiRQTr