View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/what-happened-to-streetcar-suburbs

In most American cities, there’s a kind of neighborhood that’s especially desirable.
It’s a place where you can find a lot of single-family homes with what real estate agents like to call “character,” many of which were built about a century ago, before American homebuilding took a more cookie-cutter approach. These detached single-family homes are intermixed with higher-density housing like small apartment buildings and townhomes.
There’s a lot to do in these parts of town, because sprinkled in among the homes are small businesses like bakeries, restaurants, boutiques, dentists’ offices, and more. There’s even a little bit of nature — a small park perhaps, or mature trees shading the streets.
And there are sidewalks everywhere. The residents of these neighborhoods can, unlike a lot of Americans, easily pop out for a coffee or take their kids to the library without needing to get in a car. On nice days, these neighborhoods seem to be bustling with people jogging, walking their dogs, or strolling with friends.
These neighborhoods, which began as suburbs but have, in some cases, been absorbed into the city proper, stand in stark contrast to the suburbs of my childhood, which were built in the 1980s. The neighborhoods I grew up in were built to prioritize privacy and personal property. They had their charms: the houses were big, and so were the yards. Homeowners felt like the rulers of their castles.
But there wasn’t much community in the neighborhoods of my youth. You could go for a walk, but you’d be dodging cars because there were no sidewalks. If you did take a stroll, there wasn’t much to see because the streets were cul-de-sacs, lined by houses that were hard to differentiate from one another. If you needed to run an errand, you’d have to get in the car and drive a couple of miles to a strip of chain restaurants, supermarkets, and big-box stores that offered an immense quantity of standard goods. All of this resulted in a more insular, private lifestyle.
Why did Americans build such interesting neighborhoods a century ago, and why did we abandon that format? If you enjoy the dense, walkable neighborhoods of American cities, you can thank a technology that’s no longer there. The streetcar shaped many of America’s most desirable neighborhoods, and then we killed it.
Gosh, you really should subscribe if you have not already.
In the last few decades of the 19th century, big American cities became difficult places to live. People wanted to live farther from the crowded, polluted, and dangerous city centers. The growing middle and upper middle classes desired a little more space for their families, a separation between work and home.
The problem was: if you lived farther away from your work, how would you travel back and forth each day? A walk of more than a mile or so was impractical, especially in bad weather. In an age when almost everybody walked everywhere, it didn’t make much sense to live far from the businesses that employed and sustained your family.
Slowly, transit options started to appear in cities. Big, coal-powered locomotives weren’t suited for short-haul routes where they might be stopping every couple of blocks. A more nimble solution was needed. First came horse-drawn trams, like this one in Minneapolis, which operated on rails to make the horses’ job easier:
By 1860, most major American cities had a horsecar network, which allowed people to travel a little farther from home to work. But this animal-powered transit solution had limitations. Horses got exhausted, struggled in hot weather, and had trouble with hills. And they deposited a huge amount of manure [ https://substack.com/redirect/3d9ec7fa-3745-4646-9291-d85d09de6bf5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] all over the streets. These issues limited the impact of early mass transit.
Then, in the 1880s, an American naval engineer named Frank Sprague [ https://substack.com/redirect/abdaed4b-06f3-4fac-b860-f9fb1de35d7c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] took shore leave in London. He rode the city’s famous underground, the only one of its kind in the world. At the time, its trains were powered by burning coal, which made it difficult to breathe in the tunnels.
Sprague decided to invent a better type of motor, powered by electricity from overhead wires. He left the Navy, went to work for Thomas Edison, and signed a contract with the city of Richmond, Virginia, to build 12 miles of tracks and supply 40 cars. He would not be paid until the project was complete. Sprague spent his life savings getting the system up and running. He tore out Richmond’s old horsecar tracks and replaced them with streetcar rails. He redesigned his motor so that it could reliably climb the city’s hills.
By 1888, Richmond had the country’s first streetcar network, and businessmen from other cities began to copy his innovation. Within seven years, the country had more than 10,000 miles [ https://substack.com/redirect/abdaed4b-06f3-4fac-b860-f9fb1de35d7c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] of electric streetcar routes. Another decade later, America had more than tripled [ https://substack.com/redirect/b9da0920-d82c-43c9-a125-a350025744c8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that total.
Streetcars unlocked the space around America’s urban cores. As you can see in these maps of the streetcar networks in Kansas City and Houston, streetcars covered the downtown grid and then stretched into the suburbs that emerged when savvy developers bought up cheap land on the outskirts of the city and constructed new towns. The developers themselves often built [ https://substack.com/redirect/dedcb4c7-49eb-4f50-937a-4481e1da4eae?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] the streetcar lines that served their suburbs.
Because most commuters still had to walk to the streetcar, these new towns were quite dense. Most people did not want to live more than a few minutes from transit. This meant that, as Pete Saunders [ https://substack.com/redirect/bad58b88-4e37-491c-96d7-c526f9155106?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] writes, the streetcar suburbs generally followed a few design principles: they combined areas of single-family housing with multifamily homes, all of which were within walking distance of business districts that lined the streetcar routes. These towns hit a density sweet spot, providing both “single-family enclaves that can be refuges to those who want space, peace, and quiet” and bustling commercial districts.
The streetcar suburbs that emerged — places like Shaker Heights, Ohio, Oak Park, Illinois, Irvington, Oregon, and Somerville, Massachusetts — allowed millions of Americans to achieve their part of the American dream. They are, as we’ve seen, still incredibly attractive to Americans today. So what happened? Where did the streetcars go, and why did they take the streetcar suburbs with them?
There’s a story [ https://substack.com/redirect/cb83cc8f-5d00-4a16-a1cf-dc85f1912012?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], popular on the internet, that car companies like General Motors killed the streetcar companies by buying them up and destroying them in order to usher in a new age of automobiles.
This is a fun conspiracy theory, but scholars have largely debunked [ https://substack.com/redirect/950bcd7c-9d0a-4887-8853-7170230c5db9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] it. The demise of the streetcar is more, if you’ll excuse the pun, pedestrian. It is, like so many failures, a tale of poorly designed regulations and unintended consequences.
Streetcar networks were expensive to build, which meant that many of their owners sought guaranteed returns on their investments. Streetcar magnates made deals (often corrupt; this was the Gilded Age, after all) that gave their companies a monopoly in a particular city or region. In return, they agreed [ https://substack.com/redirect/5f7eab9b-6c7a-43c7-af35-c4fd7f923c79?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] to lock their fares at a low rate, often a nickel a ride, and maintain the roadways on which their streetcars traveled.
This arrangement worked until the First World War, when inflation made the five-cent fares too cheap; companies could no longer afford to maintain their lines, but politicians did not want to make the unpopular decision to allow higher fares. Meanwhile, in many cities, cars began to populate the roads and share the right-of-way with streetcars.
Within a few years, streetcars had become a less attractive means of transportation because they got stuck in the traffic that now clogged city streets. Meanwhile, transit companies found themselves in trouble because they weren’t making enough money to run their lines and maintain the streets, which were being degraded by more and more auto traffic.
By the 1920s, many streetcar companies were in trouble. Then, in the 1930s, the Great Depression dried up the tax revenue that might have been used to subsidize them. As streetcar lines cut service, more people turned to autos; cities began to rely more on buses for mass transit, which required less up-front investment and could be rerouted to new neighborhoods when necessary. Governments focused on accommodating auto traffic, carving up cities with highways that disrupted streetcar service further.
By the time National City Lines, the General Motors-linked bus company, bought and replaced dozens of urban transit networks, the streetcar industry was on its last legs. The car industry didn’t kill the streetcar; governments allowed it to die while choosing to prioritize and subsidize the automobile.
The car allowed American suburbs to sprawl out far beyond the old streetcar suburbs, creating the mid- and late-century suburbs of my childhood. You can see the difference between these two types of places on the satellite view of Google Maps. The old streetcar suburb of Olde Town East [ https://substack.com/redirect/c7b20c6b-ec39-4912-8b2b-94f4071e136b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], in Columbus, Ohio, is dense, walkable, and has homes interspersed with businesses and public spaces:
While Laurel Canyon, further out from town, separates residential and commercial spaces and relies on the interstate for access to the city center:
But the streetcar is still having an effect even though it’s been gone for decades. A study [ https://substack.com/redirect/2a37df29-3e78-4d3d-9dc7-80c1b97c2036?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] by Leah Brooks and Byron Lutz found that areas once served by streetcars are still denser and have more diverse uses than places that never had access to this type of transit.
People seem to want to live in the old streetcar suburbs. In fact, they’re often quite expensive, and the middle class is being squeezed out of them. We should build more neighborhoods like this. But before we do that, cities will have to unwind a century’s worth of zoning and regulation that favored cars, space, and privacy over walkability and community. And we’re going to have some way to get around that isn’t an automobile. Maybe a streetcar?
This edition of the newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member, which gets you access to the archives and members-only posts:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.QnB7VCZjD7iV4QL7lqRw1qhveysR8Kq7i1jxgr-G758?