View this post on the web at https://riverkenna.substack.com/p/infra-5

Strata
Culture & history run in rhyming cycles.  Certain patterns repeat. 
Some patterns end because they’ve run their course; they did what they needed to do.
Some patterns end because they hit a dead end, weren’t viable, couldn’t go further, etc.
People often confuse these two types of patterns—self-fulfilling and dead-ending; sometimes on accident, sometimes in willful misunderstanding.
There’s an assumption on personal as well as cultural levels that unless something keeps winning forever, it failed.
 I’d like to have a better understanding of the difference between fulfilling and dead-ending patterns in different cultural-historical domains.
For example, my understanding of Romanticism (or Varieties of Romantic Experience) is that it’s a category of patterns, most of them able to be fulfilled. 
Over and over again the past few centuries, people reject mechanistic, habitual patterns of thinking and living, and venture out into a re-valuation of spontaneous creativity and soul. This pattern serves a role, providing a way to separate from a stifling society, and make space to touch back in with soul, connection, and aliveness.
Romanticism has often been called a failure. This is largely because by the standards of point 5 above, it is. It never conquers the culture and founds a new world. But that isn’t the type of goal that Romantic patterns aim at.
Certain executions of the Romantic pattern are, however, dead-ends. For example: “do lots and lots of drugs to discover Deep Truths of Reality.” There’s no need to take that one out for another runaround. 
Altering one’s consciousness—through drugs or sex or meditation or ritual or skydiving or…—is a time-honored way of entering new ways of being. But an entryway is an entryway, it only goes so far. And some entryways are addictive—physically, mentally, and/or behaviorally. Those become a problem.
Art is the prime example of Romanticism-as-Fulfilled-Pattern. The responses to art are a microcosm of responses to the Romantic pattern more generally: “But what does it do? This painting didn’t change the world, so what use is it?”
What it did was play an incremental role in the transformation of the life and psyche of the creator—and perhaps of a few others in the audience. The painting could be burned tomorrow and it would still have fulfilled its pattern. The painter’s enactment of Romantic living could end tomorrow, as he applies for an accounting job, and it would still have fulfilled its pattern.
Romanticism was just the example that came to mind.
Gnosticism could have served as just as good an example.
Hedonism or Asceticism or a general sense of Thrill-Seeking; all good examples of repeating patterns that never quite go away.
Cultural and personal patterns repeat again and again because the forces that create them repeat again and again.
In each case: Did the pattern serve its purpose? Did it hit a dead-end? Did it keep going and going? 
It’s my—maybe counterintuitive—opinion that any pattern that continues on and becomes self-sustaining is likely to be a dead end.
How sure are you that “failed” cultural movements actually failed?
Encounter
What justifies the repetition of things
Already said? Not the new form,
But the deep richness of the Mystery;
Hence the gift of a new accentuation —
The True which shifts its emphasis.
- Frithjof Schuon, World Wheel
The action movie trope where the hero leaps out of the doorway precisely as flames erupt out behind him—how old do you think that is? How many times has it been repeated?
Maybe you’ll be surprised, maybe not: it’s in Gilgamesh. Seriously.
There’s no need to fret so much over being original, over saying something new. It doesn’t matter if it’s new as long as it’s fresh, still redolent of the Mystery it emerged from.
Artifact
This map of paths (from Rosa Lewis [ https://link.sbstck.com/redirect/90fa9391-3e49-411b-ae2e-6e976f56aa22?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]) through meditation has a lot going on. First of all, the two images are the same map, just with different aspects emphasized.
What stood out to me the first time I saw it was the idea of “paths of cultivation” as opposed to “paths of practice.” I’ve tended to follow a cultivation path, deepening into particular qualities of my lived experience, but I was never given language for it. It always seemed like paths of practice were the only game in town—rigid, direct practice moving from technique to technique, insight to insight.
There’s a lot of value in this map, but that was a big one for me: giving me permission to notice how cultivation has its own virtues, its own paths, its own strengths and its own timing.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.Y9KjFo_8xQL7399FRlIXR0lKRNaNFj-g8-C8LaDNnyc?