View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/where-did-the-college-experience

It’s September, which means that the high school seniors that I teach will spend the next few months not just getting through their courses but navigating the bewildering maze of the American college admissions system.
Many of my students spent the summer going on college tours, which are all pretty much the same. There’s a PowerPoint presented by an admissions officer who tosses out a bunch of impressive statistics about the magical experiences and limitless futures that await students of the institution. Then everybody splits up into groups for a stroll around campus. The tour guides will be sure to take students and their parents past the statue that everybody rubs for good luck during exams or the archway that, if you kiss your beloved underneath it, will guarantee marriage. They’ll dwell on quirky campus traditions (”we even have a Quidditch team!”). There will be ample discussion of the free movie nights and the abundance of clubs. They’ll make sure to show them the fitness center, a dining hall, a dorm, and the student union.
Oh, and they might even take the group into a classroom or talk a little bit about education.
When my own kids toured colleges a few years ago, I was amazed at how little we heard about the ostensible purpose of college: academic learning. What the colleges seemed to be selling was less a life of the mind than what you might call the “college experience” — the strange combination of social activities, amenities, and lifestyle options that Americans have come to expect during their undergraduate years. As the person footing the bill, I wondered why, exactly, I should pay through the nose so that my 18-year-old child could have access to farm-to-table dining options and a nicer gym than I had, but nobody was selling a stripped-down version of college.
The American college experience is a strange thing: an increasingly cushy home-away-from-home, often connected to a sports-entertainment business, that provides young adults with summer-camp-style recreational opportunities and moments for creating core memories. This is connected to an academic apparatus that is expected to prepare students for high-earning careers while supporting groundbreaking research and knowledge production.
It’s all very weird. How did we end up here?
In 1766, the students of Harvard rose up against their administration in the first student protest at an American college. The source of their discontent? Rancid butter.
Tired of eating terrible food, Asa Dunbar, Henry David Thoreau’s grandfather, stood on his chair one day in the dining hall and bellowed [ https://substack.com/redirect/24a90bc2-ab30-46e8-b067-b10b3a8f0dc2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], “Behold, our butter stinketh! — Give us, therefore, butter that stinketh not.” It was the beginning of the “Great Butter Rebellion.” As the agitation grew, the administration suspended most of the student body in an attempt to compel the ringleaders to turn themselves in. It didn’t work; the administration caved in the end and let the students re-enroll.
The Butter Rebellion did not solve the students’ problem. After a brief period of improvement, the food became unpalatable again, and there was a subsequent protest over maggots in the cabbage soup. Harvard students engaged in other uprisings [ https://substack.com/redirect/7bcaa1b5-201e-49e9-a09a-86bc4edc119c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that seem to have stemmed more from adolescent rebelliousness than anything else. More than one of them started as food fights in the dining hall.
All of this raises the question: why was Harvard in the business of feeding students in the first place? How did it become the college’s responsibility to feed and house (and, later, entertain) its pupils, especially since some of them seem to have been so inept at doing so?
In the United States, we tend to use the words “college” and “university” interchangeably, but they had different meanings in the early days of European higher education.
Universities came first; they were collections of scholars who taught and granted degrees. But they weren’t always fixed in place. There was not necessarily a campus or even a building that housed the universitas. Colleges (collegia) came second, as young students who came to study with the scholars in a university needed places to live. Colleges housed and fed the students of the university.
One of the earliest of these was the Collège des Dix-Huit (College of the 18), where wealthy benefactors endowed lodging and food for 18 students at the University of Paris. Other colleges like the Sorbonne followed in Paris, and Oxford University established a similar model with Merton and Balliol Colleges, which date to the 1200s.
The English model diverged from the continental model over time. In England, colleges were given land and charters, which allowed them to become self-governing corporations. Oxford and Cambridge were in small towns, which allowed the colleges to grow and, in many ways, dominate town life. They took on more of a parental role for young scholars, working to educate their charges in good character. Eventually, fellows who ran tutorials for students were based in colleges, not universities, which made the residential college as educationally significant in some ways as the university.
In contrast, European universities tended to be located in cities like Paris or Bologna. There, it was much harder for colleges to acquire land or establish anything like a campus. On the continent, universities remained supreme. It mattered little which college, if any, a student attached himself to. Universities were for learning; for everything else, the student was mostly on his own.
As time went on, the differences between English and continental universities grew. During the French Revolution, the government dissolved all universities and colleges. They were eventually reconstituted as universities without a residential core. Meanwhile, the German model of university, developed in the early 1800s, was focused on research and teaching. Students had to organize their housing and food for themselves.
So when American universities chose to emulate the English model, they were choosing one specific model of higher learning. As they developed, American universities took the English model and turbocharged it.
The distinction between college and university disappeared almost entirely in the United States (although, in a bit of Oxbridge cosplay, Harvard and Yale tried to re-establish [ https://substack.com/redirect/79abd0aa-788d-4a98-ba45-b8102503c9e3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] it in the early 1900s). For their part, the Puritan administrators of American universities were not shy about exerting their paternalistic authority over their charges. Harvard meted [ https://substack.com/redirect/e8061d19-a080-4645-a5cd-bc8121de6faa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] out corporal punishment, whipping wayward students in public, until 1734. American universities also took on very young students (two-thirds [ https://substack.com/redirect/dbb2e0d2-2173-4bd6-9dde-225b36bca3b3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] of Yale freshmen were 16 or younger in 1826), which necessitated a certain amount of supervision from the administration.
By the 19th century, American universities developed the idea that they should act in loco parentis, committing themselves to building up the moral character of their students. An 1828 Yale report argued [ https://substack.com/redirect/19773e47-76ca-47bb-8cc1-1a57d54ff6d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that
A most important feature in the colleges of this country is, that the students are generally of an age which requires, that a substitute be provided for parental superintendence. When removed from under the roof of their parents, and exposed to the untried scenes of temptation, it is necessary that some faithful and affectionate guardian take them by the hand, and guide their steps.
Students, for their part, bristled at both the overbearing nature of their university administrators and their inability to actually feed and house young people effectively, so they started to organize their own arrangements. Today’s super-snooty Porcellian Club at Harvard, for example, may have been founded [ https://substack.com/redirect/28ec3d2c-6853-4706-992b-71ecd3e67f4d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] as a way for students to get more reliable meals (its name refers to the roast pigs that members ate). In other places, students formed fraternities (and later sororities), which were designed to create more of a family atmosphere than universities, with their bare-bones dormitories and dining halls, did. Members were “brothers” or “sisters” who shared a special bond.
After the Civil War, American college administrators decided that they needed to instill toughness and resilience in addition to intellectual ability. Thus, college sports [ https://substack.com/redirect/7ee34bee-6441-4fe5-a38a-b517fc8ab7ec?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] were born, which both gave students a way to blow off some steam (better to tackle somebody on the football field than engage in another “rebellion” over the food service) and provided an opportunity for entertainment and bonding. Athletic teams became a central part of the American collegiate experience, and Americans started to relate to colleges the same way they related to professional sports teams — by purchasing merchandise and pledging their undying loyalty.
By the beginning of the 20th century, many of the parts of the American college experience were in place. But the final transformation — into full-service theme parks with fitness centers, farm-to-table dining, and administrators and counselors devoted to every possible problem a student could have — was still to come.
These developments are the result of several intertwined trends. First, college has become much, much more common in the United States. In 1940, only 4.6% of Americans [ https://substack.com/redirect/1967e7f4-aae2-4023-90f7-d8f40640c41f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] had a college degree. Today, 38% [ https://substack.com/redirect/ddd12f21-4c1e-473f-81c8-f9b4b123e68f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] do. A bachelor’s degree is required for most office jobs, and an increasing number of employers look for even higher educational attainment. This means that students (and parents) are much more interested in the credential than in the learning behind it. The goal is to get your child the “best” diploma possible, not to find them the place where they’ll learn or grow the most.
Second, college admissions have become much more competitive as students look outside their geographical region to secure a diploma. Elite colleges admit virtually no one, and a larger and larger group of what we might call semi-elite colleges (including everything from flagship state universities to small liberal arts colleges) are trying to attract the largest group of applicants possible. Why solicit many more applications than you can accept? That’s sort of the point: colleges want to reject as many students as possible (thus appearing more selective and therefore more prestigious) and find lots of wealthy, full-pay students to help pay the bills.
Since they’re trying to attract a bunch of 17-year-olds (who aren’t always terribly interested in the life of the mind) and their parents (who are often more concerned about feeling like their children are in good hands), colleges have learned to focus their efforts on the “college experience.” They’re advertising their dorms and dining services more than their curricula. They’re getting rid of tenured positions and relying on poorly paid adjuncts while hiring legions of student life administrators. Yale now has more administrators [ https://substack.com/redirect/53aa6832-eeb1-4573-8d7d-bd71ec54122e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] than it has undergraduate students, and spending on instruction [ https://substack.com/redirect/6f325856-2438-46dc-825c-653a5dcff5b2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] is falling as a share of college budgets.
Since college is considered essential for an upper-middle-class life, and parents feel like their kids deserve the college experience, they’re willing to pay for their children to have all of these amenities, even if they’re not learning all that much. The goal is to have some fun, safe “formative years” and then procure a diploma that will make them money.
In America, it’s starting to feel like the college — the residential community that once simply housed young medieval scholars — is swallowing the university — the actual institution that does the research and teaching. Many students, parents, and university administrators seem perfectly happy to have college be an expensive summer camp on a manicured campus. Sure, students will occasionally have to go to class, but the main thing is the college experience.
This edition of the newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member, which gets you access to the archives and members-only posts:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.K8GhNXIN31hIuh3elMIBmG98bQ4FU490GyaWEQkb17M?