View this post on the web at https://www.thepsmiths.com/p/review-a-means-to-freedom-by-hp-lovecraft

A Means to Freedom: The Letters of H.P. Lovecraft and Robert E. Howard 1930-1932 [ https://substack.com/redirect/ba66df0e-20eb-4d7d-9c75-8614f8228498?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] (eds. S.T. Joshi, David E. Schultz, and Rusty Burke; Hippocampus Press, 2017).
In my review of Robert E. Howard’s Conan stories [ https://substack.com/redirect/ae5ff0d4-d490-4154-9531-ca57938f3624?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] I mentioned his two-volume collected correspondence with H.P. Lovecraft, for which I of course was not going to shell out the $60. 
Well, it probably surprises no one that I of course did shell out the $60. And I’m so glad I did, because it’s delightful!
If you’ve read H.P. Lovecraft’s story “The Rats in the Walls [ https://substack.com/redirect/ad31330d-5012-4690-a4ab-1f4e1e2078d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ],” you may remember the bit of Gaelic at its dramatic conclusion. (If you haven’t read the story, please follow that link and read it immediately, it’s better than anything you’ll find on this Substack.) But finding Gaelic there is odd, because the story is set in southern England where you might more reasonably expect to find a Brythonic language (probably Welsh) than Gaelic, spoken in Scotland and Ireland. Back when Weird Tales originally published the story in 1924, no one noted the incongruity. When it was reprinted in June 1930, however, Celtic linguistics nerd Robert E. Howard was on the case. 
Howard hadn’t yet created Conan, but he was already a regular Weird Tales contributor, so naturally he wrote to WT editor Farnsworth Wright. That letter begins with the remark that “I note from the fact that Mr. Lovecraft has his character speaking Gaelic instead of Cymric, in denoting the Age of the Druids, that he holds to Lhuyd’s theory as to the settling of Britain by the Celts” and goes on to explain Howard’s own theories on the topic. At length. Poor Wright — who was trying to run a magazine, suffering from Parkinson’s disease, and probably had very little interest in Insular Celtic linguistics to begin with — did the obvious thing: he forwarded the letter to Lovecraft. Lovecraft, in turn, wrote back to Howard and admitted that the Gaelic phrases had actually been cribbed wholesale from Fiona MacLeod’s “The Sin-Eater [ https://substack.com/redirect/9877ea35-bca9-40a3-b154-1a14ebe56c1d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]” and should not, alas, be taken as an indication of any particular stance on the debates about the prehistoric peopling of the British Isles.
Unfortunately, Lovecraft’s letter doesn’t survive. (In lamentable fact, a fair portion of Lovecraft’s side of their exchange is missing; Howard’s father accidentally destroyed the originals in the 1940s and we are left with only the transcripts Arkham House [ https://substack.com/redirect/8665ed38-6169-401d-91be-c1f4fa0b4d50?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] had already created for their five volume Selected Letters [ https://substack.com/redirect/190acfca-f428-4817-9235-5c85699109b3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] before that date.) A Means to Freedom, then, really kicks off with Howard’s response. That particular letter is actually a bit skimmable, since we now know quite a lot more [ https://substack.com/redirect/544632e6-b9cc-4b72-aacc-8ad8ad02cf32?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] about than we used to about historical migrations, but the massed effect is that of sheer joy at having been noticed by the Great Man and an intense desire to impress. 
“I say, in all sincerity, that no writer, past or modern, has equalled you in the realm of bizarre fiction,” Howard writes, and, “neither [Poe nor Machen [ https://substack.com/redirect/108ca86b-b06c-44c9-8cca-80cbf05cc9bc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]] ever reached the heights of cosmic horror or opened such new, strange paths of imagination as you have done…” And then he presents six typed pages of argument and extended scholarly quotations to bolster his case that the Cymric-speaking peoples preceded the Gaels in Britain (he’s right, by the way), followed by a slightly sheepish sort of apology for his wall of text and the hope that “you will have the time and inclination to write me again when it is convenient for you.” It worked: Lovecraft wrote back that “[y]our observations on Celtic philology & pre-history proved immensely fascinating to me…my own vague smattering sinks into total negligibility beside the array of facts & reasonable deductions at your command,” and asked Howard’s opinion on some of his own lengthy crackpot theories about the historical bases for the Fomorians, Milesians, and Tuatha De Danann [ https://substack.com/redirect/856a3f63-ddcd-4439-9f56-3af8d684d243?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].  
From that point on their correspondence became quite regular, running to 900 densely-set pages composed over just under six years. (Howard killed himself in June of 1936.) They’re both excellent writers, of course, and though they never met in person it’s a pleasure to watch their acquaintance blossom into real friendship. It’s also surprisingly familiar: anyone who’s ever made a friend online will recognize the dynamic. First the semi-professional remark on topics of mutual interest, then the increasing chattiness, the gradual sharing of personal details, the growing warmth, the introductions to third parties your new friend might like. (Also, the letters are  peppered with little asides like “by the way, what is your opinion about the origin of the Hittites?” which is 100% a thing that happens in my DMs.) They’re forever sending each other postcards and photographs and articles of interest, and it’s so reminiscent of dropping a photo or a link in the group chat that it’s almost jarring when they mention that some manuscript should be returned eventually or that “you should feel free to keep it for your records” and you recall that these are real physical objects traveling through the actual mail. 
But one of their major topics of discussion is pretty different from ours: they’re forever telling each other about where they live. This is not a feature that marks much of my correspondence — my friends and I talk about our struggles, our children, our struggles with our children, but not much about what our neighborhoods, towns, or regions are like. Partly, I think, this is because nowadays we all live the same place (online). Partly it’s because film, television, and Instagram have given us the impression that we know other parts of the world: I have a pretty good idea of what New Mexico, Delhi, or Brooklyn look like, despite never having actually visited any of them. Partly it’s because many of us live in places that don’t really have much about them that’s unique or special [ https://substack.com/redirect/ce165015-7fa2-49e0-8a54-cc8a8b4496b5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: my suburban strip mall and your suburban strip mall may at least have different kinds of cheap ethnic restaurants, but every one of our big, hip cities has exactly the same WeWork and Soulcycle and Sweetgreen. If I tell you I’m going to grab a latte at the independent coffee shop down the street, it doesn’t matter whether I live in Provo or Pascagoula or Poughkeepsie: you already know exactly what it looks like, right down to the reclaimed wood tables, exposed brick and pipework, and the water bowl outside for all the heckin’ puppers. Even the nightclubs are the same! [ https://substack.com/redirect/9350358a-6d02-4efe-83e0-26cdcac2c7d8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] 
And of course, as this spreading gray sameness [ https://substack.com/redirect/00d45040-38ac-4659-87b1-e9705710edad?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] eats up America’s cities and suburbs, we’re also moving between them. It’s hard to see past the Target parking lot (or the high rise building with a first-floor Cava if you’re cooler than me) to say much about the fundamental nature of a place you’ve only lived for a few years. At least if you layer decades of personal and familial memory, you can distinguish between the Starbucks in the big box development that used to be a peach orchard and the Starbucks in the downtown building that used to be a soda fountain. The condition Lovecraft describes here is simply no longer the case, in either direction:
Really, each average American is a citizen of his own section alone in the fullest sense. Of the whole fabric, he knows the political externals and high spots as textbooks and casual reading have sketched them; but his knowledge of intimate details, folkways, sources, backgrounds, and deep cultural trends is generally confined to the vaguely-bonded subdivisional unit in which he grows up—or at least, to that unit and the spatially and chronologically contiguous units which have shared its fortunes in the historic stream. 
Still, there really are differences even between my town and the one twenty minutes away — let alone different parts of the country. I wish I knew more about where my friends live. What are the trees like? How does it smell after the rain? Is the landscape flat and open or bunched up like a wrinkled quilt? Are the houses cozily clustered next to the street or set back amid imposing lawns? Tell me about the architecture! [ https://substack.com/redirect/f90fdcda-ac87-4c72-93b1-963c672fe311?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] 
Here’s Howard trying to convey something of Texas to his New England pen pal. I’m just going to give you a taste, but I promise there are pages of this stuff:
In the hundred mile stretch from Sonora to Del Rio on the Border, there’s not even a cluster of Mexican huts to mar the scenery and there’s just one store, a sort of half-way place. The rest is just—landscape! Wild, bare hills, with no grass, no trees, not even mesquite; not even cactus will grow there—only a sort of plant like a magnified Spanish dagger, called—I believe—sotol.
And I have an idea that the plains south of Llano Estacado are more or less wide-open. A land boom flopped there quite a number of years ago and the railroad to the town where I lived a while was discontinued. I was very young and my memories are scanty; but I remember illimitable plains stretching on forever in every direction, sandy, drab plains with never a tree, only tuffs of colorless bushes, haunted by tarantulas and rattlesnakes, buzzards and prairie dogs; long-horn cattle, driven in to town for shipping, stampeding past the yard where I played; and screeching dust winds that blew for days, filling the air with such a haze of stinging sand that you could only see for a few yards. 
It’s clear from Howard’s references that Lovecraft wrote him plenty of letters describing Rhode Island, but most of them are lost; Lovecraft had an incredibly wide correspondence, loved to talk about his homeland, and probably waxed slightly more lyrical to someone else, so Arkham House never bothered reprinting the ones sent to Howard. Here’s a bit he wrote about New England more broadly: 
These rows of buildings on a winding grey road, with stone-walled rocky pastures undulating off to the edge of a forest, and hillside apple orchards with gnarled boughs rising in the rear, present about as perfect a picture of a long-settled countryside as anything in North America. The structures fit the landscape so well—and both are so unique and distinctive and graceful—that artists never tire of painting the idyllic ensemble. Add to these things a background of tall ancient elms, an old mill by a reedy stream, and a vista of a distant valley where the massed foliage is pierced by the roofs of a village with characteristic white-steepled New England church, and you get an impression of stable antiquity and tranquil beauty not excelled by anything else this continent has to offer. … Also, the New England topography with its rolling terrain, picturesque rocks, splendid trees, and exquisite rivers and valleys, is absolutely unapproachable from a scenic standpoint. In Southern New England the landscapes are beautiful in a gentle way; but in Vermont and New Hampshire the presence of mountains adds a kind of weird grandeur. The ancient seacoast, with old ports and wharves, and memories of whaling and East-India trade, has a flavour all its own… Yes—New England is a great old country, with 300 years of continuous settled life behind it; and it'll take the machines and the foreigners a long time to tear the whole of it down!
Howard is similarly elegiac about the frontier:
Well, they have gone into the night, a vast and silent caravan, with their buckskins and their boots, their spurs and their long rifles, their waggons and their mustangs, their wars and their loves, their brutalities and their chivalries; they have gone to join their old rivals, the wolf, the panther and the Indian, and only a crumbling ‘dobe wall, a fading trail, the breath of an old song, remain to mark the roads they travelled. But sometimes when the night wind whispers forgotten tales through the mesquite and the chapparal, it is easy to imagine that once again the tall grass bends to the tread of a ghostly caravan, that the breeze bears the jingle of stirrup and bridle-chain, and that spectral camp-fires are winking far out on the plains.
They return again and again to the differences between Texas and New England. I suppose if they were writing today they might compare Shaw’s [ https://substack.com/redirect/302d3475-895c-4037-b922-bbd37181eb0b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] and HEB [ https://substack.com/redirect/2dfedf09-08b4-4b39-b79b-81c0c1655c71?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], but a hundred years ago they could compare the countryside to the unsettled frontier: “[t]he very essence of a real civilisation,” Lovecraft writes, “is the continuous dwelling of generations on the same soil in the same manner.” And Howard agrees:
[New England and the South] had the advantages of a settled and mature cultural civilization before the rise of the present machine-ruled age. You had a period of cultural development during which your ships plied the high seas bring in the wealth of foreign ports, and the arts of poetry, literature, architecture, and so on, acquired solid foundation and had the opportunity to flourish and bloom. … The Southwest and the West on the other hand, have never had the time to develope a cultural civilization of their own. The transition from primitive pioneering times to the machine age is almost unbroken. Westerners have no had and will not have time to develope any real civilization, founded on cultural ideals and principles, before the rise of the mechanized epoch.
For a very practical illustration of what they mean, check out the variety in this selection of stone walls [ https://substack.com/redirect/ea82a886-0754-449c-9151-9636826df142?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. New England’s rocky soil, its complicated geological history, and its relatively early settlement all mean that fieldstone masonry was widespread but techniques and raw materials were intensely local. In some places, you can judge your location within a few miles just by looking at the walls. 
In Texas, on the other hand, they used barbed wire. 
I originally grabbed these books because the introductory material in the Del Ray “Conan” editions [ https://substack.com/redirect/89c5a33c-d722-4e9c-b43a-86fe0117804e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] kept quoting from Howard’s letters about barbarians, and barbarism is a topic of perennial interest to…well, us, anyway. The back cover blurb of this first volume promises that Howard’s correspondence with Lovecraft eventually develops from discussion of history more generally into “a complex dispute over the respective virtues of barbarism and civilisation, the frontier and settled life, and the physical and the mental.” 
This is a lie.
This finally dawned on me about three hundred and fifty pages in, at which point I was a little annoyed. Oh, sure, they talk about it, but “dispute” is entirely the wrong word: there’s none of the argumentation, debate, or weighing of pros and cons that implies. (Marketing material misleads, film at 11.) On reflection, though, I think that’s just as well: their treatment of human populations, for example, is taken more or less directly from Gobineau [ https://substack.com/redirect/7295ab5e-5e80-4622-8878-be8aa111c216?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] and Madison Grant [ https://substack.com/redirect/331ec983-154c-47b5-8d76-b114024e1a97?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] and is thus much less interesting than it could be because we know it’s not, uh, true [ https://substack.com/redirect/544632e6-b9cc-4b72-aacc-8ad8ad02cf32?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. Any debate about human civilization based on similarly flawed facts would have been equally skimmable, just like all the Enlightenment political philosophy that claims to extrapolate facts about human nature from the condition of the Americas less than a century after their wholesale depopulation due to epidemic disease. 
The actual conversation they did have is great fun, though, because it’s really just a discussion of vibes, beautifully presented by masters of weird literature: you get a tour of each man’s imaginative landscape as compelling and satisfying as their descriptions of their physical surroundings.
It begins with a letter from Lovecraft, now lost, in which he describes what the excellent annotations call his “famous Roman dream.” Another version of this dream, which he sent to Donald Wandrei [ https://substack.com/redirect/84a0544f-7eb6-4fcd-a068-61adb69cb20d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], would be printed in 1940 as “The Very Old Folk [ https://substack.com/redirect/75f1e54e-533e-4549-b855-14e56c34a9f0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ],” and presumably what Lovecraft sent Howard was much the same: the tale of a strange dream in which Lovecraft found himself the Roman quaestor L. Cælius Rufus, confronted with hideous antique practices in the rural hills of Hispania Citerior. 
Howard wrote back that he suspected dreams contained some sort of ancestral memories:
I have lived in the Southwest all my life yet most of my dreams are laid in cold, giant lands of icy wastes and gloomy skies, and of wild, wind swept fens and wildernesses over which sweep great sea-winds… I am never, in these dreams of ancient times, a civilized man. Always I am the barbarian, the skin-clad, tousle-haired, light eyed wild man, armed with a rude axe or sword, fighting the elements and wild beasts, or grappling with armored hosts marching with the tread of civilized discipline, from fallow fruitful lands and walled cities. This is reflected in my writings, too, for when I begin a tale of old times, I always find myself instinctively arrayed on the side of the barbarian, against the powers of organized civilization. When I dream of Greece, it is always the Greece of early barbaric days when the first Aryan hordes came down, never the Greece of the myrtle crown and the Golden Age. When I dream of Rome I am always pitted against her, hating her with a ferocity that in my younger days persisted in my waking hours, so that I still remember, with some wonder, the savage pleasure with which I read, at the age of nine, the destruction of Rome by the Germanic barbarians. 
But Lovecraft disagreed thoroughly, about both Rome and ancestral memory:
I have never found it possible to feel like anything but a Roman in connexion with ancient history. The moment history gets behind the Saxon conquest of Britain, my instinctive loyalty and intangible sense of personal placement snap south from the Thames to the Tiber with startling abruptness—so that I cannot help thinking of “our “ legions, “our” conquests, “our” flashing eagles, and “our” melancholy coming fate as foreign blood dilutes the old hawk-nosed stock and weakens our fibre in the face of barbarian invasion. I have a profound subconscious Roman patriotism which takes hold where Anglo Saxon patriotism leaves off; so that my nerve tingle curiously at such images or phrases as S.P.Q.R., Alala!, the Capitoline Wolf, Nostra Respublica, mare majorum, consuetudo Populi Romani, the toga, the galea, the short sword, the aquilae, or any really Roman place or personal name… I find myself disliking the later Empire and longing for the simpler days of the ancient Republic of Cato and the Scipiones. Toward the western barbarians (my own real blood ancestors) I find myself holding sentiments of mixed fear and respect. I recognize their Roman-like strength and aggressiveness, and fear they will retain them longer than “we” (the Roman people) can manage to do. 
I’m personally with Lovecraft, but Howard inexplicably refused to be a Romeaboo:
My antipathy for Rome is one of those things I cant explain myself. Certainly it isnt based on any early reading, because some of that consisted of MacCauley's “Lays of Ancient Rome [ https://substack.com/redirect/50f48d5d-4083-45b6-859b-2b9492a58d89?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]” from which flag-waving lines I should have drawn some Roman patriotism, it seems. At an early age I memorized most of those verses, but in reciting, changed them to suit myself and substituted Celtic names for the Roman ones, and changed the settings from Italy to the British Isles! Always, when I've dreamed of Rome, or subconsciously thought of the empire, it has seemed to me like a symbol of slavery—an iron spider, spreading webs of steel all over the world to choke the rivers with dams, fell the forests, strangle the plains with white roads and drive the free people into cage-like houses and towns. 
And there the conversation lay for six months or so, until Howard made passing mention of his unfamiliarity with the ancient world. Lovecraft wrote back a long and impressionistic description of the differences between the Greeks and the Romans, and Howard in turn sighed that they simply didn’t hold his interest:
I am unable to rouse much interest in any highly civilized race, country or epoch, including this one. When a race—almost any race—is emerging from barbarism, or not yet emerged, they hold my interest. I can seem to understand them, and to write intelligently of them. But as they progress toward civilization, my grip on them begins to weaken, until at last it vanishes entirely, and I find their ways and thoughts and ambitions perfectly alien and baffling. Thus the first Mongol conquerors of China and India inspire in me the most intense interest and appreciation; but a few generations later when they have adopted the civilization of their subjects, they stir not a hint of interest in my mind. My study of history has been a continual search for newer barbarians, from age to age.
At this point Lovecraft made a noble effort to turn it into a debate: being civilized, he argued, was simply better: 
It seems to me that a vigorous, intellectual, and orderly civilisation at its zenith (not the uncertain, decaying world of today) is about the best system under which a man can live. I can’t see why the half-life of barbarism is preferable to the full, mentally active, and beauty-filled life typical of the age of Pericles in Greece or (to a lesser extent) the age of the Antonines in Rome or the 1890’s and 1900;s in pre-war England and France. The exaltation of the spirit of physical struggle to a primary and supreme value is obviously a purely artificial and temporary attitude, determined by the historic accidents of one stage only in the evolution of the social group. When this quality is regarded more intelligently—esteemed, that is, in its proper proportion beside other qualities (reason, taste, cultivation, talent, etc.) of equal importance—we cannot help feeling that the race has ascended in the scale of humanity—become better developed because more of the capacities and functions are recognised and put in use.
But Howard just shrugs. Sure, he says, maybe! Art and civilization and so forth are all very nice…
Yet when I look for the peak of my exultation, I find it on a sweltering, breathless midnight when I fought a black-headed tiger of an Oklahoma drifter in an abandoned ice-vault, in a stifling atmosphere laden with tobacco smoke and the reek of sweat and rot-gut whiskey—and blood; with a gang of cursing, blaspheming oil-field roughnecks for an audience. Even now the memory of that battle stirs the sluggish blood in my fat-laden tissues. There was nothing about it calculated to advance art, science or anything else. It was a bloody, merciless, brutal brawl. We fought for fully an hour—until neither of us could fight any longer, and we reeled against each other, gasping incoherent curses through battered lips. No, there was nothing stimulating to the mental life of man about it. There was not even an excuse for it. We were fighting, not because there was any quarrel between us, but simply to see who was the best man. Yet I repeat that I get more real pleasure out of remembering that battle than I could possibly get out of contemplating the greatest work of art ever accomplished, or seeing the greatest drama ever enacted, or hearing the greatest song ever sung
Lovecraft keeps trying to argue that civilization is objectively superior because it creates peace and order that allow for the development of higher human experiences and the expression of “a million phases of pleasurable intellectual and aesthetic experience.” But Howard doesn’t want to have a debate: “I didn’t say that barbarism was superior to civilization. For the world as a whole, civilization even in decaying form, is undoubtedly better for people as a whole. … There’s no question of the relative merits of barbarism and civilization here involved. It’s just my personal opinion and choice.” 
But of course there is a question, because even resolutely subjective aesthetic claims are grounded in (or perhaps are the groundwork for) fundamental beliefs about what a man is [ https://substack.com/redirect/b2a5f66a-d432-4b9d-9155-9725da387bc0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] and ought to be. Lovecraft thinks the best of humanity is exemplified by intellect, rationality, and order; he is enchanted by the mannered and dignified world of Augustan literature [ https://substack.com/redirect/9604dfec-a125-4401-b574-9cffe40d521a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. “Certainly,” he writes, “the 18th century has never died so far as I am concerned!” And so it makes perfect sense that the horror of his weird fiction comes from reason failing, order overthrown or subverted, or — most awfully of all — shown never to have existed in the first place. Howard, on the other hand, thrills to the struggle:
It is the individual mainly which draws me—the struggling, blundering, passionate insect vainly striving against the river of Life and seeking to divert the channel of events to suit himself—breaking his fangs on the iron collar of Fate and sinking into final defeat with the froth of a curse on his lips. 
He never makes any sort of overtly James C. Scott argument for barbarism [ https://substack.com/redirect/99b15cfb-4b55-4eb8-8482-9a1e4e299d8f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], but you get the sense the two of them would have agreed that there is something more human about a life before or outside of civilization. And accordingly that’s the core of Howard’s fiction: his heroes [ https://substack.com/redirect/0d060367-76c9-4616-98b1-3fcc5929a7b2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] are liminal figures, barbarians or outlaws or fighting men. He focuses tightly on them and revisits them again and again. Who even remembers the names of the people in Lovecraft’s best story [ https://substack.com/redirect/9cbc970d-70cb-4b1f-8807-096f7e9efd02?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]? 
But the thing is, you don’t actually have to pick! If we’re talking about aesthetic attraction and imaginative identification, you’re allowed to contradict yourself. Two visions can be logically incompatible and yet both contain true and beautiful things. You can see an “us” in the Romans and in the barbarians, depending on which part of the vast tapestry of human history is in focus right now.  You can exult in the Promethean triumph over Nature but also embrace a holistic vision of the world [ https://substack.com/redirect/d493431b-f795-4303-9232-8ced4b884172?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. You can get a kick out of the amoral “never takes sides against the family” of the Godfather movies and still get a hyper-WEIRD rush [ https://substack.com/redirect/91740854-34ad-4a09-b293-c7c11b9af9d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] from the story of Robert Graves’s train ticket: 
You can delight with Lovecraft in orderly colonial streets, in “houses on the steep hill, with fanlighted doorways and double flights of railed steps rising from the old brick sidewalks,” and also with Howard in the vast unfenced lands of the West, “raw and bold and blazing, flooded by the fierce merciless flame of the western sun.” That’s the glory of art — it can pick out what is lovely in almost anything. But that’s its danger, too, and why it matters so much why you teach your children [ https://substack.com/redirect/12a25a6d-9918-4f08-992f-6540a4c56500?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] where to look. 
Lovecraft and Howard might disagree on barbarians, but they agree completely on one thing: immigration. They’re against it. 
The great sluicegate of European immigration had already closed [ https://substack.com/redirect/a9489520-12df-424a-bc85-ec5a7f25eaae?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] by the time they began their correspondence in 1930, but it was too late as far as they were concerned. They both lament what Howard calls the “overflowing of the country with low-class foreigners.” They mourn the changing character of American cities and, increasingly, countryside. Lovecraft worries that a mass of unassimilated foreigners have “create[d] the nucleus for a body of thought and aspiration antagonistic to the established order,” while Howard returns again and again to the growing “foreignization” of Texas. It all sounds awfully familiar! In fact, most of it could just as easily be put on the lips of any one of today’s immigration restrictionists; there’s even a version of the recent kerfuffle [ https://substack.com/redirect/8ae5e4f1-0c98-443e-9871-5bf422b3e6af?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] over whether Americans are entitled to something better than jobs managing a fast food joint. (The roughly contemporary arguments in favor of immigration also look pretty familiar [ https://substack.com/redirect/ef4053f5-d22e-4a2f-b8d5-a0bfea62aa47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].) But see if you can spot the difference here, in Howard’s description of what separates him from a Slovene communist who was trying to organize the Mexicans in San Antonio:
What, to him and his, were the traditions that lie behind me, and of which I am a part? How could the representatives of two such utterly separate stocks and traditions bridge the gulf between? It can not be bridged. Not in my life-time or his. What is Bunker Hill, Lexington and Paul Revere to him? What is King’s Mountain, the Battle of New Orleans, the drift of ‘49, Gettysburg, Bull’s Run, or San Juan? Nothing. A meaningless drift of words, talismans of a slow-thoughted breed, to him inferior, in his own mind. If the difference lay just in this country, it might be overcome. But it lies beyond that. What to him and his is Hastings, the Crusades, the Wars of the Roses, the Battle of Culloden, of Bannockburn, of Preston Pans, of the Blackwater. The Black Prince means nothing to him, nor Robert Bruce nor Shane O’Neil. The gulf will be bridged when our race—your’s and mine—is destroyed by the rising tide of such as he, and a mongrel breed, lacking all sentiment and tradition, reigns over the land our ancestors bled and sweat for. And I suppose it will come to pass. I dread their adaptability, their versatility. I could have broken this fellow half in two with ease, but it was easy to see which of us had the quicker, more alert mind. In an intelligence test he would have led me in a walk and not half tried.
Do you see it? The first half is completely recognizable, and a contemporary American could add plenty of examples from the second half of the twentieth century. But who today would list great battles of English history in their attempt to limn our national character? That’s not how we think of ourselves; if we listed them at all, it would be alongside things like Tours or Thermopylae or Lepanto, as part of our heritage from “the West” writ large. But to Howard and Lovecraft, American identity was ineradicably Anglo. When you read these letters, it’s almost charming when they’re racist about Swedes and Czechs — like, really? They’re northern and central Europeans! The Swedes are even Protestants! But it’s only strange because we’ve forgotten or abandoned the way they saw America. That version lost. And then the country spent the next hundred years creating a civic mythology around the one they hated and feared.
This is less a question of the actual facts on the ground, with statistics about national origin and GDP per capita and so forth, than it is an issue of imaginative identification. You might call the America that Lovecraft and Howard described America-1: a mostly-Anglo and heavily agrarian republic of doughty yeomen farmers, cultivated gentlemen, and intrepid backwoodsmen. It was the place Tocqueville visited, and it began to fade around the time of the Civil War. Its replacement in our collective consciousness — let’s say America-2 — is America as industrial powerhouse, America as melting pot: its touchstones aren’t log cabins or steeples on the village green but skyscrapers. This is the America that put a man on the moon, the America that poured the manufacturing might of a continent into a two-front global war and came out on top of the world for at least a generation. It’s the America of Ellis Island and the Hoover Dam. It’s the America the Chinese were imagining when they made their movie [ https://substack.com/redirect/ad43604d-3dd2-4adf-b07a-43840d115a08?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] about the Battle of the Chosin Reservoir. And by 1930, it was already there (just, as the saying goes, not evenly distributed). Lovecraft saw it:
I can feel no interest in the heterogeneous, traditionless industrial and mechanical empire which this nation threatens to become. Such a thing would not have enough coherence, continuity, memory-appeal, or identification with the historic stream to give me any satisfying sense of placement, interest, meaning, or direction. It might make a great nation—another Babylon or Carthage or Rome—but it wouldn't be my nation. What I belong to is the old English Colony of Rhode Island; and when that shall cease to have a cultural and psychological prolongation, I shall be a man without a country. I am too much of an antiquarian ever to feel a citizenship in a swollen, utilitarian national enterprise whose links with the past are cut, and whose instincts and sources have to do with scattered and alien people and lands and things—people and lands and things which have no connexion with me, and can have no interest or meaning for me.
And Howard agreed: 
Once it was the highest honor to say: “I am an American.” It still is, because of the great history that lies behind the phrase; but now any Jew, Polack, or Wop, spawned in some teeming ghetto and ignorant of or cynical toward American ideals, can strut and swagger and blattantly assert his Americanship and is accepted on the same status as a man whose people have been in the New World for three hundred years. 
But America-2 remembered America-1. That “melting pot” that Lovecraft blamed on the intelligent second-generation foreigners was in fact a deliberate project of the Yankee elite [ https://substack.com/redirect/64c58de3-f797-4ee3-a729-48b749713ee1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], an acculturation of the new immigrants into a specific American mythology that drew heavily on certain aspects of the old Anglo America (and ignored others). And it worked! Right now I’m reading through Laura Ingalls Wilder with a fresh set of kids, and at the opening of Little House on the Prairie (“A long time ago, when all the grandfathers and grandmothers of today were little boys and girls or very small babies, or perhaps not even born…”) I realized that actually, at that point, all of my ancestors were still in the Old Country. But my imaginative identification, my “oh, that’s us” is all with the pioneers, not with peasants eking out a living in the hills of Freedonia. I don’t think I’m alone in this: there are vast swathes of Americans for whom America-1 is what Rome was to Lovecraft. Maybe it would have reassured him if he knew.
Today there’s another vision, which I suppose I now have to call America-3: not agrarian America or industrial America, but America as a node in the global nexus of capital and labor. This is America as a home of skill and innovation, where dreamers and trailblazers from every corner of the world come together — the America of biotech labs and gleaming Silicon Valley campuses, LAX and JFK. America-3 is rich and clean: it makes things with hands at keyboards, or carefully ensconced in rubber gloves, or better still with robots. (Calloused hands, steel-toed boots, and mud belong to the visual glossary of America-2.) America-3 already rules in our largest cities, and probably London, Tel Aviv, and Amsterdam too. Like everyone else, I spend at least part of my time there: my image of America-3 is the Fourth of July barbecue where I ate smoked brisket on a Chinese steamed bun with spicy Indian chutney and drank an over-hopped German microbrew. (I brought a cake decorated with an American flag made of berries, but as the afternoon wore on the berry juices soaked through the powdered sugar I’d used to make stars and stripes and left behind only undifferentiated masses of blue and red.) And of course it’s also the America of Haitian asylum-seekers and Afghan refugees and millions of people crossing the southern border each year, because its animating ideology is free movement across borders for people, capital, and ideas. 
It’s difficult for the opponents of America-3 to phrase their objections to it, though, because America-2 is itself a vision built on mass immigration. For Howard and Lovecraft “mongrel” may have been derogatory, but people today embrace it proudly: a “classic American mongrel” (Slovak, Sicilian, Scots-Irish, and Swedish) is never going to embrace immigration restriction as a matter of preserving ethnic identity. You can’t really engage with European-style fears of a “Great Replacement [ https://substack.com/redirect/5b4ba19e-a24e-4480-8362-3429a920c22b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]” if it already happened a hundred years ago [ https://substack.com/redirect/9e59dd2b-be60-4a5f-9920-ff2affa9f37d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]! So instead the arguments are about legality and the need to “play by the rules,” which doesn’t actually address the question of America-3 at all. What should the rules be? You can see this in the recent fight about H1B visas [ https://substack.com/redirect/93f7e958-7c0e-4b55-ace3-7b7323954535?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: even if we set aside claims that the system is being abused, there’s still a fundamental tension in the Trump coalition between America-2 and America-3. Is our country about Bunker Hill and Gettysburg and Iwo Jima, or is it about a set of laws and institutions that make it easy for the best and the brightest to come here and do great things? Is America the home of a particular people, or is it the first truly global civilization? What kind of America are you trying to make great again, anyway?
There’s plenty more in these letters. Howard goes from fanboying Lovecraft to considering him a true friend and confidant; Lovecraft admires Howard’s poetry and gives him a crash-course on poetic meter; Howard shares tale upon tale of the West until Lovecraft urges him to write them down:
I agree that it is time someone arose to preserve in vital literature the deeds and traditions of the old southwest as it really was—and believe no one could fulfil that function better than yourself. You have assimilated a tremendous amount of historic data, and have a rare type of vigorous felicity in presenting it. What is more important still, you are phenomenally sensitive and responsive to the whole psychological background and sweep of pageantry. You feel the epic drama keenly and understandingly, and can throw a vivid, intelligent sympathy into your presentations. A pile of your letters is a choice slice of literature—and one can imagine what you could do if you really sat down to mirror inclusively and systematically the heroic march of events across the soil of your native region. I certainly hope you will attempt such a magnum opus some day, and believe it would have great chances of success.
Alas, the closest Howard ever came was the Conan story “Beyond the Black River [ https://substack.com/redirect/af1b3703-e987-4ff9-8d5b-ce542f992884?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ],” where an obvious self-insert character dies bravely trying to match the deeds of a true barbarian. Still, it’s enchanting to imagine what he might have produced if he had lived, and I’m looking forward to the second volume of the letters to see what else he did write.

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlcHNtaXRocy5jb20vYWN0aW9uL2Rpc2FibGVfZW1haWw_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveE5EVTJNek14T1N3aWNHOXpkRjlwWkNJNk1UTTFOemd4TmpRNUxDSnBZWFFpT2pFM016YzVPRFUxTmpJc0ltVjRjQ0k2TVRjMk9UVXlNVFUyTWl3aWFYTnpJam9pY0hWaUxURXlOekV5TlRnaUxDSnpkV0lpT2lKa2FYTmhZbXhsWDJWdFlXbHNJbjAuVnJSY3lseHFweVh3azBubmZFNHZqdkNNWmVtZWdlUjkwX18xVkRHQVlVayIsInAiOjEzNTc4MTY0OSwicyI6MTI3MTI1OCwiZiI6dHJ1ZSwidSI6MTQ1NjMzMTksImlhdCI6MTczNzk4NTU2MiwiZXhwIjoxNzQwNTc3NTYyLCJpc3MiOiJwdWItMCIsInN1YiI6ImxpbmstcmVkaXJlY3QifQ.VwaMC7w7pCVDcDgE5we2xg5cZeTRhiJPZTsqynI1O5w?