View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/glimpses-of-carthage

This is the second installment in a series on civilizations that traditional histories only present as foils for the Romans and the Greeks. Last week we looked at the Parthians [ https://substack.com/redirect/5a75abd1-9b9a-4d3d-8694-d0241f5c36ba?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. This week: the Carthaginians, Rome’s great rival for power in the Mediterranean. 
As always, if you like this newsletter, you should subscribe! And if you think that the hours of work I put into it each week are valuable, why don’t you become a paying subscriber for less than 60 cents a week?
“It pleased the Carthaginians that Hanno should voyage outside the Pillars of Hercules, and found cities of the Libyphœnicians. And he set forth with sixty ships of fifty oars, and a multitude of men and women, to the number of thirty thousand, and with wheat and other provisions.” 
Thus starts the Periplus of Hanno [ https://substack.com/redirect/30e838a8-0b20-4bf0-96e7-6f32c46a94df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], one of the very few pieces of Carthaginian literature we have. It tells us of King Hanno’s daring voyage down the west coast of Africa sometime in the 400s BCE. His fleet found great rivers and lakes “full of crocodiles and hippopotami,” strange people who did not understand the Carthaginian language and fled from the ships in fear, and a land “covered with flames.” At the voyage’s  southernmost point, they found an “island full of savage men…”
They had hairy bodies, and the interpreters called them Gorillæ. When we pursued them we were unable to take any of the men; for they all escaped, by climbing the steep places and defending themselves with stones; but we took three of the women, who bit and scratched their leaders, and would not follow us. So we killed them and flayed them, and brought their skins to Carthage. For we did not voyage further, provisions failing us.
It’s a remarkable tale, an act of nautical exploration unparalleled for centuries afterward. Most historians think it really happened, although they argue about whether he made it all the way to Cameroon or stopped at Senegal. Are the “Gorillae” actual gorillas (the word resembles [ https://substack.com/redirect/32ecfebc-f1a5-4631-bb7a-0dc0a79dfa21?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] a Congolese word for the animals), or some mythical, made-up creature (Europeans called the apes gorillas after Hanno’s description)? Nobody knows.
There’s further uncertainty about this document. It’s hard to say how authentic it is, because we don’t have the original text, which was apparently carved into a Carthaginian temple. That was destroyed by the Romans, along with the rest of Carthage and all of its people’s literature. From this large empire centered on one of the world’s great cities, we have no poetry, no hymns, no myths, no history. It was all destroyed by the Romans. 
So when I say we have an account of Hanno’s voyages, what I mean is that we have an apparent Greek translation of a Carthaginian original. It’s hard to say how accurate it is (it’s certainly changed a bit, as it talks about Hanno establishing a “Temple of Neptune” in Africa).
This is the problem with the Carthaginians. Most of the views we can get of them come through others’ eyes, even though they were a major civilization that rivaled the Romans for control of the Mediterranean world. This is because the Romans did such an effective job of destroying Carthage and literally covering it over with a giant Roman city. 
So who were the Carthaginians? Let’s try to sift through the few artifacts that remained after the Roman destruction of the city and let them tell us about themselves. 
Hanno’s adventurous voyage down the coast of Africa makes sense if you understand the origins of the Carthaginians. The city was one of hundreds of colonies established by the Phoenecians, who built an extensive trade network [ https://substack.com/redirect/9aa631e8-1486-474e-a547-f456dcafee5f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] based in the Levant. The Phoenicians were the greatest sailors of the ancient world, and their ships, like the one carved into the stele below, stitched the Mediterranean world together.
The part of Africa that makes up modern-day Tunisia, jutting out into the Mediterranean, was a perfect place for the Phoenicians to establish a trade city. They first established the city of Utica there, and then, by the 800s BCE, Carthage, which means “New City.” It was a perfect spot for a settlement: on a defensible hill, above a sheltered harbor, at the center of the trade routes that connected Spain, Italy, Sicily, Greece, and the Middle East. 
The Phoenicians brought their gods with them to Africa, and their ideas of the divine mingled with those of the other civilizations they encountered. This Carthaginian armor breastplate, for example, seems to feature the Greek goddess Athena: 
The Carthaginian pantheon was headed by a royal couple. Ba’al Hammon, who controlled whether crops grew, was the husband; here’s a later, Romanized image of him from Carthage:
His wife or consort was the goddess Tanit, whose worship seems to have been central to Carthaginian religion. Her domain was vast: she was both a fierce warrior goddess and a patron of motherhood and fertility. Images of her seem to have been everywhere in Carthage. She shows up on coinage:
And here’s a beautiful statue of her from Carthaginian Spain: 
Sometimes she had a lion’s head:
But more common is her symbol. The so-called sign of Tanit, which looks a little like an Egyptian ankh, seems to have been everywhere in Carthage, demonstrating her centrality to their religion.
Why was Tanit everywhere? Some scholars think that her symbol was a way to ward off evil and curses, but like so much else about Carthaginian society, we don’t know much for sure. It’s all refracted through Roman accounts, and since Rome was Carthage’s greatest enemy, it’s hard to say whether the Romans were telling the truth. 
Perhaps the biggest controversy over Carthaginian religion regards child sacrifice. Several Roman sources say that the Carthaginians killed their children as a part of some religious ritual. Plutarch’s account [ https://substack.com/redirect/87440c46-bece-4d93-a385-e919de97a8d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] is the most vivid:
No, but with full knowledge and understanding they themselves offered up their own children, and those who had no children would buy little ones from poor people and cut their throats as if they were so many lambs or young birds; meanwhile the mother stood by without a tear or moan; but should she utter a single moan or let fall a single tear, she had to forfeit the money,⁠ and her child was sacrificed nevertheless; and the whole area before the statue was filled with a loud noise of flutes and drums took the cries of wailing should not reach the ears of the people.
In the Tophet, the sacred district devoted to the worship of Tanit and Ba’al Hammon, archaeologists whose excavations began in the 1920s have indeed found the bodies of many children.  
Some historians have concluded [ https://substack.com/redirect/90fddd5f-3e76-4836-a0d4-d7627a226772?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that this was indeed the site of widespread child sacrifice; others [ https://substack.com/redirect/e317181a-a452-4a94-9df2-e21601c0417a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] have said that child sacrifice was rare or nonexistent, and that this is merely a cemetery for children who died young. This stele shows a priest carrying a child; is he taking the child toward its death? 
Like so much about Carthage, we’ll probably never know the definitive truth. 
As with religion, we can often only get a little glimpse of what life must have been like for the Carthaginians. We have some sarcophagi of notable people:
Some inscriptions in the Phoenician alphabet, which was an ancestor of the Greek and Roman alphabets (this is a dedication of a sanctuary to Tanit and Ba’al Hammon):
We’ve got some of their pottery:
I like these head vases:
And these striking masks:
But my favorite things from Carthage are the little signs of everyday life. Here’s a baby bottle:
And a woman playing a tambourine:
My very favorites are these little glass heads, which are found throughout the Phoenician world:
They may have been individual charms to ward off evil, or they may have been strung together like this:
There’s something about this jewelry that suggests, to me at least, all that we can never know about the Carthaginians. Who were the people who wore these little heads around all day? What did they really think and believe?
We’ll never know the whole truth, because their society was wiped out by the Romans. But even after destroying Carthage, Rome — and the European societies that came after it — was sort of obsessed with its former enemy. We’ll look next time at the way that Carthage’s conquerors and their successors told their own version of Carthage’s story. 
This edition of the newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member, which gets you access to the archives and members-only posts:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.7i_FnioAgpIe2gDyGvU1ODvy84eyzQ_scJyQEcJk-UA?