India needs to worry about fixing four things while it's under lockdown. 

Good morning Ishan,

Are you doing okay?

India has entered a 21-day lockdown. Things are going to get worse before they get better. It’s hard for all of us, but I imagine most of those who are reading this newsletter have it better than the world’s most vulnerable— like daily wage labourers, doctors and nurses in hospitals, administrators, and senior citizens. Be kind. Keep them in your thoughts. Help.  

Let’s dive in.

Four Horsemen

In Christian theology, the harbinger of doom is symbolised by Four Horsemen, representing pestilence, war, famine, and death.

To be clear, I don’t think we are at the end of the world (even if it feels like it while reading the news), but I did think of the Four Horsemen when I was writing this newsletter.

A lot happened after India announced a complete lockdown across the nation earlier this week. Different states interpreted the measure differently. Confusion arose. Which also led to violence. Now, India is a big country, and historically, it isn’t really known for strong, efficient administration, so some of this was inevitable.

The broad view is that the decision to impose a complete lockdown across the nation—one of the most expansive measures taken by any country—is a good idea. India has taken swift, decisive, sweeping, and even radical measures in the past. An announcement is made. Everyone listens. The majority obey.

The question is...what next?

The answer: supply chains.

Supply chains are complicated things. Fundamentally, it’s a system of processes, people, and organisations involved in the distribution of a commodity, a product or a service. To make supply chains work, things need to go from one place to another in an efficient way.

India finds itself in a position where it has to manage not one or two or three but four supply chains. Arguably more than and at a scale that surpasses every nation in the world, barring China. Never before in history has India been forced to do this, not even in wartime.

In fact, one could reasonably argue, it has traditionally struggled to get even one right.

Now it has to solve four.  

In a few weeks.

In this edition, I’ll try to explain what this means.

The supply chain of money

There are two ways to control money. Through fiscal policy and monetary policy. Fiscal policy is done by the government through spending. Monetary policy is done by the central bank through interest rates. At times of crisis, both are usually invoked.

Here’s what India did.

From a fiscal standpoint, it announced a Rs 1,70,000 crore (~$22 Billion) fiscal package, mostly aimed at low-income households and the poor. It did this through a combination of direct cash transfers, food security measures, and fuel subsidies.

From a monetary perspective, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) unveiled a series of measures to boost liquidity by changing interest rates. As a result, it expects to inject close to Rs 3,74,000 crore into the banking system.

I’ll say this. These aren’t entirely bad ideas. The only (mild) criticism one could offer is that India’s fiscal stimulus, as a percentage of GDP (~3.2%), is smaller https://www.cnbctv18.com/economy/at-32-of-gdp-how-does-indias-rs-54-lakh-crore-stimulus-compare-to-other-countries-5573611.htm compared to other nations like the US (10% of GDP), the UK (14%), Germany (20%) or Canada (5%). But one could also argue that India is less affected by Covid-19 right now, and these are just the initial steps.

No, the problem isn’t the size of the fiscal or monetary measures.

It’s in the transmission.

Take the fiscal stimulus. What the fiscal measures have done is focus on the most vulnerable sections of India’s society, ensuring they don’t starve. And to do this, it has used its existing schemes.

What’s worth asking though, with the Covid-19 locking down cities and affecting urban poor the most, are these the most vulnerable sections?

As Quartz reported in its article titled https://qz.com/india/1826705/modis-coronavirus-relief-package-will-work-if-distributed-fairly/ ‘India’s $23 billion coronavirus relief package will help only if it reaches those in need’,

While large companies may be encouraged to protect the incomes of their workers, they have little influence over their downstream supply chains. In order to support informal sector workers, a limited-term basic income scheme must be introduced.

Putting cash in the hands of people not only spurs demand for goods and services but has a significant effect in buoying public sentiments. The finance minister’s proposals in this area are relatively small, bordering on the insignificant—there is no real increase in the budgets allocated for either pensions for senior citizens and widows, and the announcements made for SHGs (self help groups).

RBI’s monetary policy is another example of this. I’m not going to go into the details of repo rate and reverse repo rate, but essentially what the RBI has done is make it unattractive for banks to park money with the RBI.

The assumption here is that if the banks can’t keep the money with the RBI, they will have no choice but to lend.

This puts the ball in the bank’s court. It’s on them to transmit these gains to the end-user. All this while bank depositors are withdrawing money at an unprecedented rate https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/banking/finance/banking/depositors-withdraw-53000-crore-cash-in-15-days/articleshow/74836501.cms.

Cash withdrawals from banks hit a 16-month high when the public withdrew Rs 53,000 crore during the fortnight ended March 13, according to the data released by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Such huge cash withdrawals are seen only during festivals or elections. The central bank, which supplies currency to the public via banking system, released an equivalent amount of cash over the fortnight. Total currency with the public was at Rs 23 lakh crore as on March 13.

The supply chain of food

I’ll start with the good news.

India will have its highest stockpiles of foodgrain reserves this year. By all accounts, there’s enough to feed India’s poor for at least another 18 months. Through a combination of a great harvest last year and some decent planning, reserves are not a problem. There’s enough food.

Getting the food to those who need it is another matter altogether.

And Covid-19 is going to make that complicated.

As an example, take Karnataka, one of India’s largest states.

On Monday, when the lockdown was in place, Karnataka’s State government announced that Indira Canteens—which are located across the state, would provide food for free to daily wage workers and poor people.

One day later, it rolled this back https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/karnataka/karnataka-government-makes-u-turn-no-free-food-at-indira-canteen/article31149654.ece.

A day after he announced free food for the urban poor at Indira Canteens during the COVID19 outbreak, Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa made a u-turn. Pointing out that crowding increases the risk of transmission, the CM on Tuesday ordered a lockdown of the canteens, without providing an alternative for the poor.

“We saw crowding at Indira Canteens after announcement of free food. At times of an epidemic, we cannot allow it. It’s impossible to keep it open. We will have to make changes in our announcement. Till March 31, people will have to bear with it,” the CM said when asked about what those who cannot afford to buy food are to do.

It’s one thing to want to provide food.

It’s another to actually do it.

This isn’t an easy problem to solve. Not at Indira Canteens. Not at ration shops across the country.

The supply chain of people

Both India and China share a common facet that makes Covid-19 much more dire and deadly.

Both countries have a high share of migrant workers. Unlike the US, which is a bit more local, China and India have a vast share of people who live in rural areas and move to cities to find work.

How many?

As many as 470 million in India.

That’s one of the biggest reasons Covid-19 spread so rapidly out of Wuhan.

And it’s also a big problem for India.

As Times of India reported https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/with-no-transport-migrants-make-the-long-march-home/articleshow/74838123.cms,

A new humanitarian crisis may be unfolding in the country. Tens of thousands of desperate people, mainly migrant labourers reduced to joblessness by the lockdown and with little or no money or food, have been streaming out of India’s major cities for the past few days, trying to walk hundreds of kilometres to reach their homes in small towns and villages.

These tides of men, women and children, driven by the uncompromising arithmetic of survival and fear of contracting the coronavirus, pose a new challenge to the government’s all-out attempts to contain the spread of the disease.

Transporting people across the country has never been as important as it is today in India.

But how does one do it without risking transmission of the virus?

The supply chain of healthcare

Zoya Brar is the CEO of CORE Diagnostics, a clinical diagnostics company based in Gurgaon.

Three days ago, Ms Brar put out this tweet.

She wasn’t the only one. Just search on Twitter and you’ll find dozens and dozens of people, all tweeting to Fedex, asking when their medical supplies will be delivered.

Vidya Krishnan, who has covered healthcare for 17 years, and was most recently the healthcare editor for The Hindu, wrote in a searing piece for The Atlantic https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2020/03/india-coronavirus-covid19-narendra-modi/608896/ :

The World Health Organization warned on February 27 of a coming disruption in global supply chains, advising countries to create their own stockpiles of the personal protective equipment that medical workers would need.

The Indian government waited until March 19, however, to finally issue an order prohibiting the export of domestically made PPE, and a further five days to ban the export of respiratory apparatuses.

There are more such delays: Only last week did the government finally allow health-care workers treating patients suffering from COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, to be tested; it also only recently began testing those without a travel history, a long-overdue implicit admission that the virus was being transmitted locally; and it has just issued notices to private hospitals to submit tallies of the number of intensive-care beds and ventilators available and to cancel nonessential surgeries, and directed facilities nationwide to ensure those suffering COVID-19 are neither stigmatized nor turned away. Even the measures the authorities have taken have had unintended consequences. The lockdown, for example, bars factory workers from going to work, leading to a shutdown of the medical-device industry, and prevents truckers from transporting materials and stocks to hospitals.

This is a problem. At a time when it’s important to be quick, nimble, and move workers and equipment across the country, something that’s crucial to quelling the virus, India seems to be struggling.

Look, it’s likely that this will change. It’s possible that we may figure out how to do all of this, and do it well.

For the next few weeks, keep an eye out for this.

Keep an eye out for how we are doing across these four supply chains. In the end, that may, quite literally, be the difference between life and death.

What We Are...

For today’s edition, I asked some folks at The Ken to send me interesting, happy things that they’d like to share. Here’s what I got:

...Reading

Arundhati sent me this glorious story from The Atlantic, titled The College President Who Simply Won’t Raise Tuition https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2020/04/mitch-daniels-purdue/606772/. The story is beautifully written and leaves you filled with optimism. It’s about Mitch Daniels, who has frozen Purdue’s tuition at less than $10,000 for seven straight years.

And all the way from Malaysia, Kay sent me this heartwarming story about how cops that were patrolling the streets extended a helping hand https://www.freemalaysiatoday.com/category/nation/2020/03/26/johor-cops-help-struggling-couple-buy-milk-for-toddler/ to a low-income family to buy milk for their baby. I asked Kay why this was happening, and this is what she told me:

“The lockdown has made it difficult for Malaysians to commute from Johor to Singapore for work—many cross over to the city-state daily. So even a simple blue-collar job in Singapore is enough to sustain a small family in Malaysia. But with this lockdown, those without accommodation in Singapore are forced to go back to Malaysia and sit around without a salary.”

...Watching

From Savio, who is watching a video by 3Blue1Brown https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kas0tIxDvrg that explains exponential growth in the context of Covid-19. But not in the way you think. Here’s what he wrote to me on Slack:

If you are going to be bandying these words about in all conversations, might as well do it in an educated way. Plus, about halfway through the video, you start to see why true exponentials may not even even exist in the real world. Hope!

...Cooking

Guess what Olina is doing? She’s experimenting with one-pot cooking.

I asked her why.

She said:

Making one-pot meals is the best use of resources. How creative can you get in one pot? That's the challenge.

Come on, Olina. Why are you really doing it?

One-pot conserves resources, rations…

And…

...and most importantly, dish-washing.

Here are some recipes https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M61viP3prdQ.

...Drinking

Trust Sneha to know what’s the rage on the internet. This time, it’s this thing called Dalgona coffee https://www.latestly.com/lifestyle/food/dalgona-coffee-is-viral-trend-on-social-media-heres-how-to-make-whipped-brew-that-has-caught-internets-fancy-watch-videos-1637948.html.

At first, I thought, like a typical marketer, she was making it up. But she insisted she wasn’t. So I checked.

Man, the internet is something.

So here’s the deal. This new fad originated in Korea, seemingly thanks to people who have a lot of free time on their hands (and limited ingredients). Take filter coffee, sugar and water, and beat it for 20 minutes. Boom, you’ll get something amazing.

I would link you to a recipe, but there really isn’t one. Just three ingredients. Free time. And arms. That’s all you need.

That’s about it from me.

Hope you are safe. What are you doing to kill time? Tell me.

Regards,

Praveen Gopal Krishnan

praveen@the-ken.com

Want to unsubscribe from Nutgraf, our weekly newsletter?

Unsubscribe https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=vp7P62HPo07CfZPD4ULsDFlWPGMj0p9ufS-sq17qrS_7eXCaIgSOIwvRUYe-wLbcinjnjl7fR4ujWC8AL6pCwKXf0Ss8HUaC3ma2gMVqmqdpTJliTYcI56RSOtXJzwpW9YwC-QsgxkqqLT9BAaypC0QvGcRBSACqErZix8-vdZp-nUMRDI0iiIzwShDHqGUfsRGI2eJxRnsQQQ-FjC7t4RN6Kdap-Wh8tmh3A7eCC80iWwPqClMESm-LoZhBAqcEYU0AVlEIZN3dpwO1qV9G6bOE4RfPnOTvOAwHxGQ4lk0zEJbREBFV2noxWHiwR0V6yMJGwhn4ogvQt9-IP9AsAZvCSgnS73A2xagVME3UZycq9jAY-040ZKMefPfll2Wz63So5pyrrKwcp9oG_iAAKNDb5gOtI3I9PbM4w-beea-V3ytXrNzGxTTZcx04cSu6OLDIPgEGaFkQbcWK9NWxfo5gOaZcq1K79BFk0jgWCW5ooLzB7-saDwvyWN7WoHTz5_hzfTH_87O2yDpIAvzB7sgVwd_sf4WJoOp7fWsMAV9OfyCmERtT0tIg9BKUbx6j - Unsubscribe Preferences https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=MxFkDSpzvoSLmZNzTdjdvA80qpHYRTeEf4EsWPv79IS8Q7h-nICwiu5GMlaTuCpd8x5CF6B6H0yhMaBRHz5TfvXufozVg8obNT6nbgE6Y5dbJ7q5z0Ie-O-PHDgkoa5nnx2_Y9NciFAnWssWIVusNifVWqvhO0L0oUthEaJ5YLZUxzNpwiOTxdvgAJsxfdPdCl0hZyk0rxeTePFkb7hAU0ZCEZ9TA1dYMU2qdR4xR-k-XX9iedjRQ8LQXnYN9rcVxJhl0KxrWk8eA-QfaehZEBdBiGjtyzw8tKmuSj9m2iJzVoIN17P_5C4BXL6JoTp13Sz8hg-MXceKkrkDbcSbagyigT8fTyaJhk6VTIY8gQDts-YKLxF36JyzsfgVCyamaKPwdMcfHhulNNSgtsiv3ee6oWdvWAFQ2gDTBTlLhD7gWuA-b5CV6VPZv2yNUvfbtNL4zDK-zIcBMEUVD0vcFjT0I8LlUPCdmgkeW0mbAQlPF_tV8UXgtATtijTsTLRVQW57bwLcMo4MYtklZ4GZJj1axMqAhSxB99FB_9paBaE=