View this post on the web at https://whyisthisinteresting.substack.com/p/the-tuesday-media-diet-with-kristina

Kristina runs the Upper House which is one of my favorite hotels. We’re pleased to have some Hong Kong representation with us this week. Excuse the Tuesday send, one of the paywalled articles auto-sent on Monday. Enjoy this edition! -Colin (CJN) 
Tell us about yourself.
I am the General Manager of The Upper House [ https://substack.com/redirect/24eb7e9c-e4f7-4e58-85ac-754577ce897e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], here in Hong Kong. I am half Indian, half English, both my parents were born in HK and my sons are now the fourth generation of our family to be born and growing up in HK which makes me incredibly happy. Hong Kong holds such a special place in my heart and there is truly nowhere like it in the world. I feel incredibly lucky to be here surrounded by my entire family. My favourite colour is purple, I would describe myself as Type “A”, a perfectionist and being a “controller’ to the core! I am a morning person- with 3 young, energetic boys I have to be! I love to start the day with my gratitude list, thinking of all the things small and big I am thankful for. Also having one hour me time to sweat it out in nature every morning pre- work is essential to my emotional and physical wellbeing. HK has some of the best hiking trails in the world at our door step so I take full advantage of that. I attribute my love of hotels to my late grandfather who fostered a deep love of service culture in me. 
I started in the industry at the age of 16 doing summer hotel internships and part-time catering stints, and it’s been true love ever since. Studying Hotel and Restaurant Management at École Hôtelière de Lausanne was honestly one of the best experiences of my life. I feel so grateful for my time there and for all of the incredible people that I met, both students and teachers alike; EHL is unique for the exposure to an enormous variety of cultures to the hugely international student base and the vast network this provides after you graduate. 
Ultimately, school taught us the true values of hospitality: autonomous thinking, respect, empathy and caring for others. I have been privileged enough to have worked with some of the best brands in the world including Mandarin Oriental, Ritz Carlton and Grand Hyatt, all within the front of house operations. My earlier hotel life experiences included working as a bellman and door lady for these prestigious luxury properties. None have felt like home as much as Swire Hotels where I have now been for the past 12 years.
Describe your media diet.
So much of what I subscribe to on various channels, EDM/Newsletter/Ig is content related to my passions for travel and the hotel industry, holistic wellness + longevity and family/ parenting education. I love podcasts as they allow me to dip in and out whilst on-the-go. My favourite series’ over the last year are quite varied in terms of content, but so helpful in my various roles as a working mother of three, while leading a team of over 300.
• Raising Good Humans by Dr Aliza
• The Diary of a CEO with Steven Bartlett
• Pursuit of Wellness with Mari Llewllyn
My strict rule is no phones at the dinner table and no phones in bed. I leave mine in another room and read a book pre-bed – usually having to re-read the same chapter multiple times as I will almost always fall asleep a few pages in
What’s the last great book you read?
On the book front, I’ve just finished Dare to Lead by Brene Brown. She has such an authentic voice, which reaffirms where I place my own energy in the workplace. My goal to always be an authentic leader, to lead with a strong set of values, from the heart and with openness and resilience, to create a strong foundation of trust - and ultimately bring longevity.
What are you reading now?
I am re-reading Atomic Habits by James Clear. My husband introduced this to me years ago and I am trying to instil some new habits for myself and the family.
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favourite publication?
I save it until I am alone in a quiet space and read it in one sitting cover to cover!
Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
Outlive: everyone needs to read this! My sister in law got our whole family onto this last summer and I have bought it for all of my close friends since.
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Anything related to lists, for family its Cozi. I’m a list fanatic - making them for work, home and personal at the start and end of each day keeps me in check.
Atiom – an amazing training app we work with across the Houses which helps to enhance our culture whilst also gamifying training to make it fun + approachable.
Endel - a great app to zone in + focus.
Beekeeper – we use this as our main internal work social platform to share content, stories and best practices
Duolingo - helps to keep up with my Spanish.
Keeper - stores all your passwords, documents and access does in one place. Also includes a VPN.
Brave browser - instead of using Google chrome or safari, you use Brave Browser. Blocking all unwanted pop ups and websites trying to access your data.
Plane or train?
100% Plane for the in flight movies and the pre-flight lounge experience. I will arrive at the airport nearly 3 hours before my departure time, just to enjoy the best Dan Dan noodles at the Cathay Pacific Lounge at HK international airport before flying. Added bonus are the beautiful Bamford linen and amenity kits on board!
What is one place everyone should visit?
I lived in Barcelona in my twenties and it’s my favourite European city of all time! Everything from the food, culture, people and climate are just incredible. The city is full of life and a place that everyone should experience! One of my most memorable trips was a short flight away to Menorca in the Balearic Islands, an untouched oasis with its pristine beaches and crystal-clear water – pure paradise! During my most recent trip to Menorca with the whole family last summer, we ventured to L'Illa del Rei for the first time which was incredible. The newer Hauser & Wirth outpost has taken over the repurposed 18th-century outbuildings of a naval hospital to create the 1,500 sq.m art centre. After a tour of the open-air exhibitions, we had a magical dinner al fresco in their olive grove restaurants which was sensational.
Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into.
The Sauna. I am a fairly recent fanatic since we introduced our longevity suite at the House (10x Longevity). Understanding the differences of traditional sauna vs. infrared. The benefits, how long you should go in for, breathing and stretching in there, could I build one on our tiny balcony at home. It is my new obsession! (KSL)

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93aHlpc3RoaXNpbnRlcmVzdGluZy5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vYWN0aW9uL2Rpc2FibGVfZW1haWw_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveE5EVTJNek14T1N3aWNHOXpkRjlwWkNJNk1UUTVOalkyTVRFMUxDSnBZWFFpT2pFM01qYzNPVFV5T0Rnc0ltVjRjQ0k2TVRjMU9UTXpNVEk0T0N3aWFYTnpJam9pY0hWaUxUY3dNREFpTENKemRXSWlPaUprYVhOaFlteGxYMlZ0WVdsc0luMC4xUV80T05yUVNOTHNmTXc3RWRnSjVMblpxT0N5d0JZMEZMYWRKZnBVVm9JIiwicCI6MTQ5NjY2MTE1LCJzIjo3MDAwLCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzI3Nzk1Mjg4LCJleHAiOjE3MzAzODcyODgsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.ay_xhLXrZj2r5vuw00Y9BmiHDj4K_gNZc4rA4MGjEmc?