View this post on the web at https://whyisthisinteresting.substack.com/p/the-monday-media-diet-with-matt-spevack

Matt Spevack runs Spevack Lab and I love his taste. -CJN
Tell us about yourself.
I run a design studio in New York called Spevack Loeb [ https://substack.com/redirect/ac3517db-84bf-48af-a569-f3f678767d66?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. We do branding, creative direction, and web design and development, for clients across real estate, hospitality, fashion, art, and finance…a bit of everything.
More recently, we’ve expanded into interior design, both residential and commercial. I had a very hands-on experience renovating my apartment in lower Manhattan and have always had an eye for sourcing art, objects and furniture. I’d say as client work it’s largely the same, but designing physical spaces has been a nice change of pace. We’re still fielding plenty of brand work, but this felt like a useful pivot given how quickly things are changing in our industry.
Outside of the office I’m developing a tennis apparel brand called Nayer Tennis. I play a lot of tennis and I care a lot about clothes and it’s been interesting to approach something from the ground up with more of a focus on product and business development than brand and marketing.
Describe your media diet.
I scroll Instagram as much as anyone else, but it’s mostly keeping up with friends, along with a steady diet of New York Yankees news and tennis highlights. I follow brands and other design studios, but not super actively. I try to stay generally aware of what’s happening in fashion, art, and media, but I make a conscious effort not to let it influence my work too directly.
From time to time I’ll listen to a podcast or read an article, but it’s usually at the recommendation of a friend. Honestly, nothing has held my attention more than a couple of weeks, and I’m regimented about canceling unused subscriptions. I watch plenty of TV and most new movies. I stay up to date on business and investment news via good old-fashioned Google searches. My group chats are incredibly active (probably where I do most of my reading)…and my wife is a journalist, so I get all the other news cycle highlights delivered to me directly.
What’s the last great book you read?
This is a particularly bad question for me. I don’t think I’ve finished a book since high school. I have plenty of time to read, but I just prefer to use my hands and stay active. If I’m relaxing at home, I’m either cooking or cleaning or sewing or fixing something around the house. I always have a pile of Poshmark clothes to alter and a bunch of cooking projects going on. I’ll organize our closets and fold the laundry. But I’m not just sitting on the couch reading. I need to stay busy, develop a new skill, accomplish something tangible.
What are you reading now?
My one and only newsletter subscription is to the Tribeca Citizen although my interest has waned since moving a few blocks north of Canal street.
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication?
We do get a lot of print subscriptions at home and I have quite a few friends who are writers, so I enjoy seeing their names in print.
Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
While I don’t find reading very stimulating, I do think everyone else should be reading. I’m surrounded by friends in the media so I tend to absorb a lot of information secondhand. I can advise you on bathroom tile and chicken stock but I didn’t read that best-selling novel nor that New Yorker article everyone’s talking about. When I’m hanging with friends I’d rather contribute something totally different to a conversation, or just gossip. I guess some might argue that reading would have the benefit of expanding my mind, but I already have so many creative and administrative projects I’m excited about that I can hardly keep up with my own ideas. That’s my unapologetic justification for not reading.
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
LTR [ https://substack.com/redirect/aea13435-12df-4112-8072-ed663297c468?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] (Live Tennis Rankings) is a good one. ATP rankings are typically updated every Monday after tournaments are completed, but if you want an accurate, up-to-date understanding of the points available or needed to defend within a tournament (match to match), LTR has you covered. The UI is horrible and you have to fight off a million pop-up ads, but I think that’s what I love most about it. It’s not trying, but it’s totally functional, and I’d trust it with my life if my life depended on ATP points.
McMaster-Carr [ https://substack.com/redirect/0b274d52-efb7-4da3-b12c-d688c437d01c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] is another good one. I think it’s actually a great design and an amazing shopping experience. Anything you could ever need! The navigation is a delight, and I really appreciate the photography.
Plane or train?
I’m good with either. I mostly bike around the city. I never take the subway and feel too guilty taking a cab. The bus is cool if I have time to kill.
What is one place everyone should visit?
Agata & Valentina [ https://substack.com/redirect/4802b8af-7378-4acd-8bce-ef34023cfb09?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] is a grocery store on 79th and 1st that I grew up going to everyday. It’s this beautiful, authentically New York, grocer with prepared foods, produce, meat, fish, sushi, pantry items, baked goods, and basically anything else you could think to munch on, all somehow smushed into this little chaotic maze of slanted terracotta floors. You’re tush-to-tush with Yorkville’s elite, vying for aisle space as you order your antipasti and barbeque salmon.
Everything prepared and packaged by them is so appealing to me—partly because I’m repelled by the slop of CPG brands at big supermarkets—but also because of the nostalgia and randomness of their selection. I live in constant fear of all my favorite neighborhood institutions disappearing, so please visit and spend all of your money there.
Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into.
Everything I do is pretty rabbit-holey. It’s hard for me to just scratch the surface. Sometimes it’s tied to a big life event. This past year I got really deep into wedding planning, which was a combination of a million little creative projects: florals, food design, furniture, photography, print design, and clothing. The year before was my apartment renovation. We’ll see what’s next.
Right now I’m sampling knit jacquard drawstrings for the tennis shorts. I’m always discovering new old apparel and footwear brands. I’ll get obsessed with random tools and objects like kitchen appliances or plumbing hardware. And if I can’t find something then I’ll look into making it myself.

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93aHlpc3RoaXNpbnRlcmVzdGluZy5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vYWN0aW9uL2Rpc2FibGVfZW1haWw_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveE5EVTJNek14T1N3aWNHOXpkRjlwWkNJNk1qQXlPVGsxTURNNUxDSnBZWFFpT2pFM09EVXhORGt5TVRRc0ltVjRjQ0k2TVRneE5qWTROVEl4TkN3aWFYTnpJam9pY0hWaUxUY3dNREFpTENKemRXSWlPaUprYVhOaFlteGxYMlZ0WVdsc0luMC5CRWd5aHpfVy16X19HR09La0V2V0RWeXp2ejZ3VlZJclZlM2JTMjdYTEQ0IiwicCI6MjAyOTk1MDM5LCJzIjo3MDAwLCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzg1MTQ5MjE0LCJleHAiOjIxMDA3MjUyMTQsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.mBlXlrCiKBlYGJkksZpiUKB58LZqPuxJGwFBV15T5Zk?