Our first major design overhaul. And our second premium product

Hello Ishan,

Six months and three days.

That’s how long ago we kicked off our most ambitious and exciting project since launching The Ken in October 2016. And boy, are we thrilled to take the wraps off for you today!

Welcome to an all-new the-ken.com https://the-ken.com/, our first major design overhaul since rolling out our distinctive and original design three years ago, almost to the day https://twitter.com/TheKenWeb/status/836768800724770816.

On Aug 29th last year I wrote to Mumbai-headquartered Opposite https://oppositehq.com/ (then called Beard Design), our design partner. “It’s time” was the subject line of my email. 

The new the-ken.com website adopts bold cues, sheds staid conventions, and amps up features keeping just one experience in mind: yours. Here’s a brief lowdown.

Deep subscriber personalisation – this is the overarching influence and language you’ll find on our new site. We spent months trying to understand how and why subscribers read our stories, and then tried to make it as seamless an experience as possible.

The entire site as a giant “reading list”
	Visible reading progress indicators for all stories, with bidirectional sync with our apps
	Better options to save stories for later reading
	Intelligent recommendations on what stories to read next

Context beyond stories – while our journalism continues to be driven by our deeply reported and original stories, we realise we can enrich them with more meaning.

Dozens of “narratives” present a longer arc than just single stories. Sort of like seasonal and episodic arcs when it comes to TV shows.
	Comments from subscribers are now more prominent, including those that our writers call out.

Tons of other new features

Redesigned story pages
	Richer subscriber profiles
	Detailed writer pages and prominent bylines
	All new social sharing
	Doing away with story categories entirely

But perhaps no feature is more ambitious than the one on the top-right corner of your screen. Editions.

Today is the day we’re taking the covers off what is only our second premium product, The Ken Southeast Asia! https://the-ken.com/sea

Led by editor Jon Russell in Thailand, our talented team of journalists across Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Singapore will bring you four new original stories and one exclusive newsletter each week. 

The Ken Southeast Asia will be a separate product, with its own identity and pricing. And as a sign of gratitude for the thousands of subscribers who signed up for its waitlist, we’re making it available exclusively to those on the waitlist for now. 

Not just that. Those on the waitlist have the chance to reserve an annual subscription at a discounted price. This price will not be extended to fresh subscribers.

This is a pivotal moment in The Ken’s evolution from a single-product subscription offering to a multi-product one. We feel it’s the best way we can invest significant additional resources, bandwidth and energies into creating newer products for newer markets and subscribers.

Phew. 

Oh, and one more thing. Our app is currently down. Sorry.

Due to a major overhaul of the way our site operates at the infrastructure level, our app threw a tantrum at the last minute by refusing to communicate over APIs that worked perfectly earlier.

We’re fixing this on priority. Give us a day or two more. Till then, please use our website—either desktop or mobile—to read our stories?

And if you find some bugs for us to fix, please email us at info@the-ken.com.

Regards,

Rohin Dharmakumar

CEO

rohin@the-ken.com

You can choose to opt-out from our emails. Click here. https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=O6UkHLAmDwQL0nKh7sgZwhZ4hcd39O_rBcTdcH5pmm1zkgCVUzk1jJEuzSNZ3imdc4th0qyl5D_B4Y6-SbUx8sKzXDSo_IALefUmAQGxmsbGQuQECxT0AOe_Vo_JMvEx71lPIF2-jyhoKLfiyUNawQhRzcFmDoIyMAD0o5W6sMh0vFNSETZ0nl15zcvrP0yYzIBUc-aBF1DCBwD68WpxZ7ezhYbCl9-LOdFyJ1WBZ8O9B7LrTCOX7F55IddMHeNoYkgiVpGtzxIb2ubnutnGFfll-0OerWc5m80qY5WhEbU2FEdJ4GoOZonCKcilUK-vihyN1ADwq9TYhdjQsMCU8FsO0KAwYod9W85K6X-5ak91jWDN-78psuV_wPw3BbqDEp0D70-mf4GOU_eVfDmxjIdzSPYb6sXoEYVEl9sKowQ3K8PaWQ5J2PHJNTLWiaL87tzg8sJeOaPANotWSprub3DI6AJfFwkmyKE8Vm6tyeEMpqzVvbLRXH1-zPhPhxZvvdgH2hJzuzgdfFFz16K1gZL8I18XDY06w60E8djYdhSre7yOvZwqMFRGk8-64XHn