View this post on the web at https://chamath.substack.com/p/deep-dive-chinas-industrial-might-and-domestic-policy

About 6 months ago, I had an eye-opening dinner with two CEOs building an American supply chain for EV battery materials and rare earths.
Back then, I tweeted:
“...the difficulty in beating China won’t come down to tariffs but mercantilism.
The Chinese have 1-2 ‘National Champions’ for critical parts of the global economy. They then subsidize these NCs as necessary, dump product to impact spot price markets and shape profitability with loans and grants that, collectively, make these National Champions impossible to beat…”
With further research, I want to expand on what China’s playbook has been.
Beijing doesn’t simply pick “National Champions” and back them with unlimited capital. That would be highly inefficient - the Soviets tried it and, broadly speaking, failed. Part of what separates modern-day China’s state-backed model from the Soviets is decentralization.
Rather than selecting a winner, Beijing designates an industry a “national priority”. It then instructs its 31 provincial governments to nurture that industry. Those 31 provincial governments in turn back over 300 prefecture-level governments (think of one prefecture as a medium-sized city plus its surroundings). Then, the 300+ prefectural governments compete against each other in what you could think of as a national tournament.
The local governments use many tools to foster their own companies in the “national priority” sector. For example:
Granting more favorable loans
Giving away cheap or free land
Subsidizing companies in the priority industry
Constructing industrial parks and factories to serve the industry
An illustrative but imperfect analogy could be to imagine the prefectural governments as state-guided VCs. They deploy a lot of capital and most of the companies they back fail, but some winners emerge too.
Except the local government officials aren’t incentivized by investor returns, but by promotions. As we covered in Deep Dive 1 [ https://substack.com/redirect/ee5ddb65-53a0-451e-aea5-682aada7fd73?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], the CCP, China’s ruling party, rewards officials based on a range of economic and social KPIs. To bring this back to the “National Champion” discussion, that means that you have 300+ local government leaders incentivized by the potential of a promotion, backing their local industry.
China’s process for fostering “National Champions” is both top-down and bottom-up. It’s top-down in the way that Beijing designates priority industries. And it’s bottom-up in the way that 300+ local governments compete to back their own firms with subsidies and cheap credit, hoping some become national champions.
This tournament-style competition creates some national champions (like BYD), but it also generates problematic overcapacity.
That is because hundreds of local governments back firms simultaneously, even in sectors that cannot support so many players. Most of these firms survive longer than they would in a market system thanks to subsidies, cheap credit, and soft budget constraints. The result is chronic oversupply, thin margins, and wasted capital.
Consider EVs as a case study in overcapacity and overinvestment:
China’s EVs are taking over the world - out of the 17 million EVs produced in 2024, 12 million were made in China. It’s widely been reported how China’s cheap EV “market dumping” undercuts Western competitors. But why is China dumping these EVs at low profit margins?
China’s local governments started backing EVs in 2009 after the central government made it a priority industry. That surge of support created 129 domestic EV brands, far more than China needed (and far more than would’ve been efficient).
Out of those brands, only two publicly traded companies, BYD and Li Auto, have achieved full-year profitability. The industry’s average profit margins are down from 7.8% in 2017 to 4.2% in 2024 (for comparison, Tesla posted a profit margin of 7.3% in 2024). Last year, Chinese car plants were only utilized at 50% of their capacity.
Fiscally, China’s large investments are reflected in its debt-to-GDP ratio.
Officially, China’s government debt sits at 96.3%, which may be above Germany (65.4%), but still sits below the United States’ (122.5%).
But this “official” number leaves out the huge debts of local government financing vehicles (LGFVs), which borrow off-budget to fund infrastructure and industrial projects. It also excludes the large debts of state-owned enterprises and the rising liabilities of households. 
Taken together, these shadow obligations make China’s debt burden far larger than the headline government figures suggest:
At the same time, China has considerable assets:
For one, take infrastructure.
After the 2008 Great Financial Crisis, China invested hundreds of billions of dollars into infrastructure
The country now has one of the world’s best transportation networks, high voltage transmission lines, and digital infrastructure
It built more solar energy capacity in 2024 than the U.S. has in total
Second, look at technology and innovation.
China added more robots per capita than any other country from 2018 to 2023
Its R&D spending is close to rivaling the U.S.
It produced a bigger share of the 100 most well-cited research papers than any other country in 2023
Lastly, look at sheer industrial capacity.
China adds more manufacturing value than the U.S. and EU combined
Its workforce has deep process knowledge from assembling goods for international firms
The country has 7 out of 10 of the world’s busiest ports
This is what China has going for it.
However, there are several massive forces pulling it down (demographics & fleeing capital to name a few).
So how did a country once known for cheap toys and textiles leapfrog into EVs, solar, and AI?
How far will China’s newfound assets allow it to scale before its debt and demographics start to weigh it down?
How does China’s coordinated approach to tech development compare to the West’s market-driven competition?
That’s part of the macro question I wanted to discuss in this next deep dive of Learn With Me.
After the dinner, I concluded that we need better organization and capital allocation if we are to win against China.
This deep dive showed me which parts of China’s economic strategy we should learn from - and which parts should serve as a cautionary note.
In this deep dive, we focused mainly on the domestic effects of China’s internal systems and economic policy.
I hope you enjoy reading and learning about China with me. Let me know what you think in the group chat and comment section.
Chamath
Deep Dive PDF below ↓
Disclaimer: The views and opinions expressed above are current as of the date of this document and are subject to change without notice. Materials referenced above will be provided for educational purposes only. None of the above will include investment advice, a recommendation or an offer to sell, or a solicitation of an offer to buy, any securities or investment products...

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.B7X__bQP5F3kCqb1AzsuYOyLVyEfGyQQeO0C3976V6s?