Hey there! It’s Tivadar from The Palindrome.
Quick note to let you know about the new additions I’ve been making to our paid tier.
As you might know, premium subscribers to The Palindrome get:
Immediate access to 100+ in-depth articles from the archives. Think of this as an infinite book.
Access to start their own threads in the community chat.
In addition, subscribers on the annual plan are invited to our bi-weekly cohort-based course on Neural Networks From Scratch, with access to all recordings and a special Discord server for discussions.
Now, based on your feedback, I’m adding two new features starting from next week:
1. Weekly premium articles
I’ve decided to reward our community of 480+ premium subscribers with an extra exclusive deep dive per week.
So, from now on, expect two weekly newsletters: one totally free and usually featuring a guest author, and one exclusive for paid subscribers.
But the next addition is what makes me most excited:
2. Live streams and recordings
I was blown away by the reception of the bi-weekly live cohorts, so I decided to put together a setup for live-streaming on Substack.
And it works wonders…
So, starting from next week, I’ll schedule a Substack live to:
share behind-the-scenes of The Palindrome,
teach a live lecture on a topic decided by you,
invite guests to share insights on the machine learning industry,
and much more. Think of it as The Palindrome Office Hours. You can join them right here on the Substack app.
The live streams will be available for everyone, but the recordings will be available only to paid subscribers.
If you want access to all the exclusive benefits that a premium subscription gets you, you can join here in two clicks [ https://substack.com/redirect/9582ad80-e5e6-430e-8ee4-1b924ed45209?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
(It’s 58% cheaper if you join on the annual plan.)
And if you are enjoying the free version of the newsletter, that’s perfectly fine.
I’m grateful to have you here!
Cheers,
Tivadar
P.S… If you have any questions about the paid tier of The Palindrome, reply to this email and I’ll be glad to clarify everything for you.