View this post on the web at https://threads.championswimmer.in/p/optimising-costs-to-enhancing-ux

Imagine you build a hyperlocal delivery app (like Swiggy/Delivery Hero/Uber Eats etc). 
The top level API response for a user typically is all stores around them, typically paginated (infinite scroll etc) with info like name, rating, a thumbnail, estimated ETA etc 
At the top level response the information you show is a aggregated/derived from many deeper levels. For example - 
Rating: this is avg cumulative rating, that is affected as more ratings come in 
ETA: this might depend on time of day / traffic conditions and user's location
Typically many of these large hyperlocal companies would have 10M daily active users. Each of whom open the app an average of 2~3 times a day, but 90% of it will be during peak time of day, hence you'll end up with say an API hit rate in the order of 1k to 10k rps
Just running these services ….
a ratings service, from which aggregated ratings for each store is picked
an ETA estimation service, that has some simple deterministic models that factor in ToD and traffic levels
a search service from where store listings can be queried
…. can easily run you into cloud costs that are anywhere in the order of $1M to $10M a month.
Now you realise that the road to profitability lies in reducing these costs by at least 75-90% (regardless of other things like removing discounts, stopping marketing etc)
Thanks for reading system bashing! Subscribe for free to receive new posts and support my work.
There's a lot of things you can look at, at this point.  
Let's take an easy example. 
If a store has 1000 reviews already, 1 new review will not change the avg rating (but it will for a store w/ 5 reviews) 
So we can save the avg rating on the store object itself and update it only after a threshold (eg 10%) of new ratings for that store have been updated since last update. Or more simply - run a cron every day at low load time to update this info for all stores. 
Want to reduce even more costs? Run the cron once every week instead.
ETA calculation for listings is trickier. It is based on the distance of the store from *you*, the user. Hence the response is different for each user based on the lat/long in query parameter. 
Also it changes based on traffic conditions in that area.
What if instead of factoring in the whole lat/long to last digit of accuracy (of these 2 points which are both within Cubbon Park)
12.9719304, 77.5916280
12.9777639, 77.5972214
You only read upto certain digits only
12.97, 77.59
That makes the responses a lot more cacheable 
If someone from 1km radius around you made the API call few seconds back, you get to hit the cache. 
Then to address the traffic conditions - of course for every 0.01 degree of lat/long grid - you can save a "traffic factor" for each square. 
Update it every 1min
So whatever we have been discussing so far - sounds a lot like typical "High Level Design" round discussions with a bunch of "engineering optimisation" discussions. 
But in practice - this isn't just some technical decisions that leads us to design systems like this
The answer to the question - do we use lat/long grids of 0.01° or 0.001° has a lot of implications.  
It determines how accurate the ETAs for your user (and what is an acceptable approximation for your user experience)
It also determines your cache offload and thus cloud costs
You'll have to balance the user experience and the cloud costs and come up with an appropriate solution. 
A CFO saying "idk anything, I won't allow more than 5000 cores for search service" is oblivious to the fact that horrible ETA calculations lead to low orders.
A product manager saying "you cannot group ETA estimates for more than 50m radius" is oblivious to the fact that their job won't exist if the company doesn't turn a profit by next quarter
And they probably don't have data about how much % ETA deviation causes what % order loss
In my book it is all engineering. 
Understanding the acceptable constraints of the user experience (eg. ETA deviation limit is 10%) is also much the responsibility of engineering as it is to understand the cost of running the system.
In my book it is all engineering. 
Understanding the acceptable constraints of the user experience (eg. ETA deviation limit is 10%) is also much the responsibility of engineering as it is to understand the cost of running the system.
Thank you for reading system bashing. This post is public so feel free to share it.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.L3gjqLxR--W8qyNYxXxGLzBYhBf-QqcG9dei_yFknk8?