View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/visions-of-greenland

Welcome to Looking Through the Past! At its heart, this is a project in which I find a bunch of cool stuff every week and share it with you. It takes hours of research and writing to produce. If you’re new here, you can click the button below to subscribe. If you’re already a free subscriber who appreciates getting a bunch of cool stuff in your inbox every week, please consider a paid subscription to support my work — it’s less than $1 a week!
If you’re interested in supporting the project in other ways, please scroll down to the bottom of the post.
Donald Trump’s obsession with the world’s largest island may stem from a misunderstanding [ https://substack.com/redirect/721ffcc1-268e-43a0-9a68-b229b90e05af?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] of how map projections work. Greenland looks huge — almost as big as Africa — on maps using the standard Mercator projection because it’s close to the North Pole. In reality, Africa is 14 times larger [ https://substack.com/redirect/72fefbcd-231f-46d8-9f81-cbd253667178?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] than Greenland. Could the president be destroying [ https://substack.com/redirect/5735433a-c1bd-405b-bdb8-6aeccd2a8fc0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] ties with a NATO ally over a basic misunderstanding of the principles of cartography?
It’s entirely possible, and it wouldn’t be the first time the outside world’s actions toward Greenland have been based on a shaky foundation. From the beginning, outsiders have been drawn to Greenland by misperceptions and fantasies. The island has been a source of romance and opportunity, but has frequently confounded those who misunderstood it. 
The story starts with Erik the Red, a Viking murderer who was forced to flee Iceland in 980 and ended up roaming the North Atlantic. He famously named his new home Greenland even though it was icy and forbidding, not a land rich in cattle and hunting as he claimed. The name was a marketing ploy, according to the Saga of Erik the Red [ https://substack.com/redirect/cc647e89-9083-4db9-974e-a68b05dc2094?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]:
In the summer Erik went to live in the land which he had discovered, and which he called Greenland, "Because," said he, "men will desire much the more to go there if the land has a good name."
Some of Erik’s compatriots believed his sales pitch — he took 25 ships full of Vikings on an expedition to Greenland (only 14 of the ships made it). These settlers were the beginning of a Viking population in Greenland, living mostly in the southwest of the island, that would eventually number in the thousands. The Vikings scraped out a living by hunting walruses and keeping livestock, trading with Iceland and the local indigenous people. But the Vikings also clashed with the locals — who they called Skraelings — fighting a series of bloody battles with them. 
The Norse Greenland settlements persisted for a few centuries, eventually becoming part of the Kingdoms of Norway and Denmark. They eventually disappeared around 1400 — the last record of Viking activity in Greenland dates to 1408 — for reasons that remain mysterious. The Little Ice Age may have made Greenland harder to inhabit, Viking agriculture may have exhausted the fragile ecosystems of the island, the Black Death may have disrupted trade routes, and/or elephant ivory from Africa may have reduced the demand for walrus ivory from Greenland. Nobody’s quite sure. 
Meanwhile, Indigenous people belonging to the Thule Culture moved south and occupied the lands the Vikings had once ruled. The voyages of Christopher Columbus and his successors opened up far more lucrative opportunities for colonization, and Europeans lost interest for a while in the icy climes of Greenland. 
Absence, however, made the European heart grow fonder. The mystery of what had happened to the Norse settlements in Greenland captured [ https://substack.com/redirect/989046b4-9f53-4f7a-8fca-afa912aab91d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] the attention of later generations, and Europeans developed several myths about the island: that it was full of valuable resources like silver, gold, and game and that its inhabitants were vicious, uncivilized brutes. 
Europeans developed semi-mythical ideas about Greenland; mapmakers and illustrators used the island as a setting for fantastical scenes like this 1550 illustration of a dwarf and a man fighting:
Or they thought of it as the home of “sea unicorns [ https://substack.com/redirect/c0badb09-cd76-41ec-8445-710bcc48a64a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]” (probably narwhals) whose horns had healing properties. Here’s one from a 1558 illustration:
And another from a 1694 book claiming that the sea unicorn (licorne de mer) was a separate species from the narwhal:
Some information was a little more reliable, coming from the whalers who worked off the coasts of Greenland. This illustration shows a relatively accurate map of the island and the process of whaling:
By the 1600s, Danish colonialists were talking themselves into a conquest of Greenland. It was their right, they claimed [ https://substack.com/redirect/989046b4-9f53-4f7a-8fca-afa912aab91d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], because the island had been “once governed by, and paid taxes to, Norway, and subsequently to Danish kings, when the Norwegian realm was ceded to Denmark.” Plus, there might be a remnant population of Christian Vikings who had been hanging on for centuries, waiting to re-establish contact with the outside world.
As whaling ships from various countries plied the northern seas near Greenland, it seemed important to Denmark to create facts on the ground that would cement its claims to the island and its purported riches. 
Enter Hans Egede, a Lutheran priest who doggedly petitioned the King of Denmark to allow him to lead missions to Greenland for the dual purpose of converting the people there, including any Catholic Vikings who may have remained, and claiming the island for Denmark. As was the fashion at the time, Egede formed a “Bergen Greenland Company” — modeled on the Dutch East India Company — to exploit the resources of the island. 
Loyal readers might remember Egede from an earlier post, in which the “Apostle of Greenland” spotted what he thought was a sea monster but was likely in fact a giant squid:
But Egede did far more than spread rumors of mysterious beasts in the sea. His voyages to Greenland began in 1721, when he set out with a few dozen other Danish people to establish a tenuous colony. Their settlements struggled mightily; they were almost wiped out several times by scurvy, bankruptcy, mutiny, and smallpox. On top of all that, it turned out that the Inuit people of Greenland were not very interested in Christianity. And they found no lost population of Viking descendants.
Despite Egede’s difficulties in accomplishing many of his goals, his writings and the illustrations that accompanied them shaped outside perceptions of Greenland for a long time to come.
Some of the earliest publications based on Egede’s reports depicted Greenland as a forbidding waste [ https://substack.com/redirect/a79c04b3-5dc0-488e-b378-e281e61d5d88?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] populated by ignorant savages. But Egede did find some aspects of Inuit culture to be impressive:
One cannot enough admire how peaceably, lovingly, and united they live together; hatred and envy, strifes and jars are never heard of among them. And although it may happen that one bears a grudge to another, yet it never breaks out into any scolding or fighting; neither have they any words to express such passions, or any injurious and provoking terms of quarrelling. 
His book, A Description of Greenland [ https://substack.com/redirect/bb81dd41-8360-4e7c-ba23-8ab8095c59ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], gave outsiders their first peeks at Inuit culture. Here’s a festival with music and dancing:
Egede was interested in their sports:
 Ball playing is their most common diversion, which they play two different ways. They divide themselves into two parties; the first party throws the ball to each other; while those of the second party endeavour to get it from them, and so by turns. The second manner is like our playing at foot ball.
And their wrestling contests 
they love to pass for men of courage and valour, they will try forces together, in wrestling, struggling, and playing hook and crook, which is to grapple with the arms and fingers made crooked, and intangled like hooks. Whoever can pull the other from his place, thinks himself a man of worth and valour.
He noted their hunting exploits and techniques, both on land (note how abundant the illustration makes the land seem):
And at sea.
as to the seas, they yield more plenty and wealth of all sorts of animals and fishes than in most other parts of the world, which may turn to very great profit; witness the exceeding great riches many nations have gathered, and are still gathering, from the whale fishery, and the capture of seals and morses, or sea horses.
Egede’s illustrations focused on the local species, especially those that were exotic and lucrative to hunters.
 I like the bear at the bottom of this one, giving a grade-school-picture-day smile:
Overall, Egede was focused on showing that Greenland was a suitable site for his goals — full of uncivilized people who made good targets for Christian conversion and natural resources that, under modern cultivation, could make Denmark rich. 
Egede’s missionaries created small communities of Danish settlers in Greenland, but much of the island remained mysterious to outsiders. 
Many illustrations of Greenland and its landscapes were based on second- and third-hand reports, like this 1769 drawing of the “Inuit manner of dress” produced by Jean-Baptiste Le Prince, who never set foot in Greenland:
The mystery was enhanced when a French explorer, Jules de Blosseville, disappeared with his 83 men while exploring the eastern coast of Greenland in 1833. Three separate rescue expeditions failed to find a trace of him. Blosseville’s became known around the world; Jules Verne referenced him in several novels. 
The nineteenth-century fascination with adventure and exploration led many Europeans to depict Greenland and its environs as an exciting and dangerous backdrop for impressive escapades. 
Artists like Carl Rasmussen looked back to the Viking days of adventure: 
Other artists depicted modern ships braving the icepack, as in this William Bradford painting from 1871:
Photos tended to give this impression, as well — like this one from 1869 captioned “Hunting by steam in Melville Bay, the party after a day's sport killing six Polar Bears within the twenty-four hours.”
Explorers like Fritjof Nansen — the first European to cross Greenland — captured the public imagination with their daring and grit:
And cigarette cards exoticized the island’s native people:
Nineteenth-century Greenland was, these images told the world, a harsh and exotic place where, if people could stay alive, they might find glory or even riches. 
But I’d like to leave you with images created by native Greenlanders that provide a less mythic idea of the island. Aron of Kangeq, an Inuk artist who worked in the early 1800s, created ordinary scenes of life, like this bird hunt:
And the baptism of a person named Akamalik:
A little later, a native printmaker named Lars Moeller produced a number of colorful works in the 1860s based on the drawings of a Danish artist named Hinrich Rink. They, too, show a more placid, welcoming island, full of people living their lives:
They especially highlight the island’s natural beauty:
So which is it? Is Greenland a mythical land with exotic creatures? A tantalizing storehouse of natural resources? A forbidding place where outsiders can test their manhood and appetite for danger? A realm of immense beauty? Or a place where a small population of mostly indigenous people lives ordinary lives? 
For centuries, the outside world has projected its desires onto Greenland, usually disregarding the wishes or interests of the people who actually lived there. Now, the United States seems to be taking a turn. I doubt we’ll do much better. 
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
You can share the newsletter with others:
You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.6N_1jjGim5Ra9fbmybwdNQuBU0VfrZfLZcTZH3znfEA?