View this post on the web at https://thegeneralist.substack.com/p/the-next-unicorns

Friends, 
Two weeks ago, we released the Future 50, a deeply researched list of the world’s highest-potential startups, valued at or under $200 million at the time of nomination. 
It became our most popular piece of the year within a couple of days and continues to introduce readers to some of the most interesting companies on earth. I am certain that many of these organizations will go on to become unicorns, decacorns, and, perhaps, generational businesses. Welcome to all the new amazing readers who have joined us! If you haven’t jumped aboard yet and are interested in reviewing the complete list, today’s the perfect opportunity. 
We spent more than five months building the Future 50. That included seeking nominations from the best venture capitalists in the industry, researching each startup, reviewing confidential information, and making final selections. I personally studied each company carefully, digging into their technology and learning what makes them unique. 
By joining as a premium subscriber [ https://substack.com/redirect/eaef1af3-9a5a-42ac-9985-676842de1318?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], you’ll get access to a private database of quality companies with the information to help you get up to speed as quickly as possible. That has real value for investors, operators, and founders. 
Investors. Whether you’re an angel investing on the side or a professional VC, the Future 50 offers an easy way to ensure you’re on top of the industry’s breakout companies. We’ve included comprehensive information to help you determine whether a company is in your sweet spot. 
Operators. Picking the right startup to join is one of the most important financial decisions you’ll make in your life. The Future 50 offers a detailed way for you to uncover extremely high-potential startups that have the potential to become real rocket ships. 
Founders. See what sectors great emerging founders are targeting and learn about their approaches. You’ll find promising companies to partner with and new ideas to further your thinking, test your assumptions, and bring back to your own company. 
To make the Future 50 even more valuable to readers like you, we spent the past week leveling it up even further. Here’s what we’ve added to the database, compiled from public sources: 
Total venture funding announced. See how much each startup has announced in venture funding, and sort to fit your interests.
Most recent funding round. Dig into the startups that have just raised a seed, or explore those heading towards their growth rounds. 
Select customers. We’ve added a list of select customers for B2B companies. This will help you get a sense of the size of the customers each startup is signing and where they’ve found traction. 
Further reading. If you want to read more about a company, we’ve got you covered. We’ve collected the most interesting articles about each startup to guide your further exploration.
Of course, these are just the latest additions. If you haven’t checked out the Future 50 yet, you’ll find a curated collection of fascinating startups accompanied by detailed descriptions and a clear rationale for why we selected them. Join as a member to discover all 50 startups, including these 5: 
The AI brain that Bill Gates name-checked
The Anduril of public safety 
The crypto security startup with an engineering “SEAL Team” 
The three-year-old Latin American fintech handling $1B in annual volume 
The B2B marketplace addressing a $1T “apocalypse”
By joining as a member, you’re unlocking The Generalist’s most popular and valuable piece of the year for just $22/month. I hope to welcome you aboard soon! 
Brought to you by Mercury
If Jony Ive built a banking* experience…
It would look a lot like Mercury. The Generalist has been a Mercury customer for years, and I’m constantly awed by the platform’s beauty, thoughtfulness, and power. It’s become a core part of how we run our business and is probably the only banking product I find a genuine pleasure to use. 
Mercury’s banking experience isn’t just loved by The Generalist. Some of the world’s most prominent and promising startups – like those named in the Future 50 – trust Mercury to simplify their finances and power essential workflows, like paying bills or sending invoices. By using Mercury, customers save time, get granular visibility into their finances, and have finer-toothed control over money movement. 
Apply in minutes today at mercury.com to simplify your finances and perform at your best.
*Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and Evolve Bank & Trust®; Members FDIC.
The Future 50
Meet 50 of the world’s highest-potential startups. Nominated by investors, selected by The Generalist.
To unlock the full list, you can join as a premium subscriber here [ https://substack.com/redirect/eaef1af3-9a5a-42ac-9985-676842de1318?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. To read more about the Future 50 before subscribing, you can check out our announcement post here [ https://substack.com/redirect/62a29ad0-3156-497b-a81c-77c6d615a746?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.9dAUC5qjtCfrYfwl9hih269sDchn4EH5X7Wlzjxx93U?