View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/what-is-the-first-estate

Thanks for reading! This week, as part of our series on the art and material culture of the French Revolution, we’re looking at how perceptions of the clergy changed during this period of upheaval. 
To receive posts like this in your inbox, subscribe! And if you think these posts are worth a few bucks a month, consider becoming a paying subscriber!
In a proper Catholic kingdom, everyone played their role under the loving eye of the divine. People were told that a good life consisted not of climbing the social ladder but instead of playing one’s designated role as well as possible. Societies like France were divided into three “estates,” each of which had its role in carrying out God’s will. 
Artists tried to represent this ideal, harmonious society. In this woodcut from Strasbourg, we see Jesus presiding over the first estate (the clergy) on the left, the second estate (the nobility) on the right, and the third estate (everybody else) literally beneath the first two estates:
This 15th-century manuscript is a little nicer to the third estate — they’re still at the bottom of the social ladder, but at least they’re normal size:
This was the way things were for centuries. Each estate, it was argued, played a key role in society: the third estate worked, the second fought, and the first prayed:
Just before the French Revolution, Abbé Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès published a famous pamphlet asking, “What is the third estate?” His answer was that the third estate was “everything” — that the other two estates produced little of value while hoarding the country’s wealth and political power. 
Sieyès had a point, and his question fueled the revolution. But it’s also worth asking: what was the first estate, which got pride of place for all of those years?
First, it was tiny. In France, a nation of 27 million people, only 130,000 or so were members of the clergy. About 50,000 of that total were women. Though it made up less than 1% of the population, the first estate seemed wealthy: it owned 10%  of France’s property, collected tithes from every peasant, and charged rents on its lands. It paid no taxes, making only a token, voluntary donation to the country’s finances.
The first estate was, however, not monolithic, nor was it like the other estates. Membership in the second and third estates was passed down by birth. It was virtually impossible for a commoner to ascend into the aristocracy, because spots in that class were assigned by one’s birth. But the first estate, sworn to chastity, could not reproduce itself. Therefore, one of the few ways for commoners to improve their social status was to become a priest or a nun. 
Though membership in the first estate was open to anyone willing to make their vows to the Catholic Church, aristocrats still held an advantage: people spoke of a “high clergy” made up of nobles that held the important bishoprics and church offices of France; members of the “low clergy” would not be able to hold such offices, no matter how smart or holy they were. Most of the wealth flowing into the church ended up in the hands of a very few aristocratic bishops. Village priests lived quite simply.
This 16th-century depiction of the estates attempts to show the diversity of the first estate on the left (while the poor third estate is represented by a couple of guys shoveling in the background):
Though the illustration above might make it look like French society was split into three equal parts, that wasn’t the case. The third estate made up 97% of the population but only owned two-thirds of the land. The other estates not only held disproportionate wealth but paid lower taxes than members of the third estate. As revolutionary sentiments simmered, artists started to depict the three estates differently.
Here, in a 1789 print, the clergy helps to crush commoners:
And here a fat priest and a nobleman burden an exhausted worker:
As the revolution got underway, images of the clergy got even less flattering. Here the aristocracy, including a bishop, tears the flesh from the corpse of the commoners while a “fanatical” priest and nun lead the way:
People began to openly depict the clergy as corrupt; this 1789 illustration shows a priest pretending to refuse a donation from a commoner while taking it with the other hand (the caption reads, in part, “What you give with one hand you take away with the other. But this will be the last time.”)
Despite the fact that many priests supported the revolution and the vast majority of clergy members came from common backgrounds, the church came under attack. It brought in immense sums but refused to use its wealth to pay down the country’s debt. Only a few months into the revolution, the National Assembly passed a law giving the state control of all church property. Then it went further, closing the monasteries and convents and selling their contents:
Finally, in July of 1790, the Assembly passed the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, which essentially made priests and bishops employees of the state. Pope Pius VI refused to accept the Constitution, so the revolutionary government commanded all clergy to take a public oath of loyalty to the Constitution. Revolutionaries burned effigies of the pope:
And imagined the devil conspiring with him:
Priests had to choose: were they loyal to the church or to France? The French church split into “jurors” who had taken the oath and “refractory priests” who had not. The revolutionary pamphlets praised “patriotic” priests who swore loyalty to the state:
They even got their own commemorative plates:
Meanwhile, artists imagined that refractory priests would suffer in the wilderness:
True patriots might be expected to beat recalcitrant priests, while their mothers looked on approvingly:
Though the humbling of the French church only affected a small slice of the population directly, it represented a profound cultural shift. Revolutionaries exulted that the once-fat first estate had been starved:
And imagined the priests and nuns living it up, freed from the strictures of the church (check out the priest making out with the nun):
Many refractory priests fled France altogether, only to have the Assembly decree that they could not return:
Whatever you think of the campaign against the first estate, you can’t strike at an institution as central to a society as the church was to France and have it go smoothly. Support for the church became tied up with counterrevolutionary sentiment. It also put elites in a bind; this cartoon shows Louis XVI struggling to reconcile his willingness to agree to a constitutional monarchy with his support for the church:
The sporadic violence that characterized the early days of the revolution found a target in the clergy as the crisis grew. The church became an enemy within, a ready-made target for furious revlolutionaries.
A group of women attacked [ https://substack.com/redirect/89eb072f-7ea0-466a-9c18-6e6e23fb762e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] nuns in Paris in 1791, alleging that they were corrupting their students and disloyal to the revolution. A popular revolutionary journal [ https://substack.com/redirect/152af88c-4a80-4630-aa62-128b139fcad7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] celebrated the incident. In September, a mob attacked Parisian prisons and killed prisoners whom they suspected were working with France’s enemies. At least 200 of the dead were priests:
The caption (helpfully labeled with numbers that correspond to locations in the drawing) reads, in part:
Paris, murderer, what has become of you?..
You massacred (4) the priests arrested at the Temple of Charmes, even though they begged for mercy. (5) The abbess who had long shown kindness to a poor woman, who was cured of her illness through her care, was beheaded as a reward by this she-devil.
This would just be the beginning of the French Revolution’s war against the first estate and the Catholic Church. Next week, we’ll look at what happened when things really got extreme. 
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.V_3IkKIozMRoyPm9WPLDsV78Pn-W173TfCRS1_C3Yi8?