View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/the-scythians-are-still-elusive

Nobody went on a tangent quite like Herodotus. The “father of history” traveled around the Mediterranean world, wandering from his home in Asia Minor to the Levant, Babylon, Italy, Egypt, and Greece. He did so in search of the truth, or at least a good story. 
Herodotus’s narrative is as peripatetic as he was; he’s often less interested in complete accuracy than he is in taking his reader on a ride. In Book 4 of his Histories, he interrupts the narrative of Persian conquest to wander into central Asia, explaining the nomadic people who live there. He calls these people the Scythians, and he spends about half of one of his nine books telling us all about them. 
From Herodotus [ https://substack.com/redirect/7cdef52e-e16c-446a-9afb-955d418a9946?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] we learn that:
“The Scythians blind all their slaves, to use them  in preparing their milk. The plan they follow is to thrust  tubes made of bone, not unlike our musical pipes, up the vulva of the mare, and then to blow into the tubes with  their mouths, some milking while the others blow. They say that they do this because when the veins of the animal are full of air, the udder is forced down.”
Some remote Scythians “are said to be all — both men and women — bald  from their birth, to have flat noses, and very long chins.”
They live in a place that “has winters of exceeding rigour. During eight months the frost is so intense, that water poured upon the  ground does not form mud, but if a fire be lighted on it mud is produced.”
“The Scythian soldier drinks the blood of the first  man he overthrows in battle. Whatever number he slays,  he cuts off all their heads, and carries them to the king… The skulls of their enemies, not indeed of all, but  of those whom they most detest, they treat as follows. Having sawn off the portion below the eyebrows, and  cleaned out the inside, they cover the outside with leather.  When a man is poor, this is all that he does; but if he is rich, he also lines the inside with gold: in either case the skull is used as a drinking cup. They do the same with  the skulls of their own kith and kin if they have been at  feud with them, and have vanquished them in the presence of the king.”
“Hemp grows in Scythia… The Scythians, as I said, take some of this hemp  seed, and, creeping under the felt coverings, throw it  upon the red-hot stones; immediately it smokes, and gives out such a vapour as no Grecian vapour-bath can exceed;  the Scyths, delighted, shout for joy, and this vapour serves them instead of a waterbath; for they never by  any chance wash their bodies with water.”
Was this all true? Even Herodotus himself isn’t terribly sure. He tells a story about people with the feet of goats who hibernate six months a year and live beyond the Scythians but admits, “it does not seem to me credible.”
The Scythians are, Herodotus wants us to know, out there somewhere beyond the civilized world, and they’re fascinating. 
Herodotus wasn’t the only Greek to find the Scythians captivating. The Greeks who settled around the Black Sea surely interacted with Scythians, who roamed the nearby steppes with their herds of horses. The Scythians showed up in Greek art fairly often. They usually had similar characteristics. They were archers in pointy hats:
They were lightly armored, wearing pajama-like clothing:
In many ways, the Greek depiction of the Scythians fits into the way they saw many easterners, including the Persians (I wrote about Greek depictions of Persians [ https://substack.com/redirect/beaed4e7-525f-438c-8f50-66c03708aaf5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] a couple of years back). Other societies took a stab at depicting the Scythians, as well. The Etruscans tended to associate the Scythians with horseback riding, as you can see here:
And atop this urn:
And here the Scythians are on a Buddhist relief from modern-day Pakistan. These Scythians are not crafty archers or master horsemen, just musicians having a nice time:
This Persian relief shows them bringing tribute to the Persian Shah, wearing their characteristic pointy hats:
So the Scythians were on the minds of a lot of ancient cultures in the Mediterranean and Western Asia. They’re generally portrayed as an exotic enemy or a subjugated foreign group. We’re not terribly sure who the Scythians really were; historians mostly agree that there probably wasn’t a fixed group that called themselves the Scythians; modern scholars prefer to speak of “steppe cultures” or “Scytho-Siberians.” Because they were nomadic, the Scythians didn’t have a fixed territory. They roamed throughout Western and Central Asia between 700 and 300 BCE. As they were in warfare, the Scythians remain elusive.
But what can we learn from the Scythians themselves? They didn’t leave behind writing, so the only stories we have are from foreigners like Herodotus. But they did create striking works of art that demonstrate their skills, their wealth, and their exposure to the cultures they bordered. 
One thing you can tell from Scythian art is that horses were important to them. I very much enjoy this guy (probably originally mounted on a pole of some sort):
And they made lots of these horse cheekpieces with little decorative horses on them:
In fact, animals of all kinds seemed important to them. Stylized animals appear on their small, golden ornaments. This deer with florid antlers would have been affixed to someone’s garment:
Here’s a juvenile elk:
A stag with magnificent interlocking antlers:
A possibly mythical lion:
And a definitely mythical griffin:
This fragment of a belt shows several motifs at once:
And — my favorite — a hedgehog charm that would have appeared on a necklace:
Sometimes you would get an elaborate scene, as on this belt buckle:
It’s difficult to say just how much Scythian art was their own invention and how much they learned or borrowed from other cultures, like the Greeks. Most historians agree that the two cultures shared ideas and copied each other to some extent. What we can tell is that Scythian elites invested a lot of their wealth and time into these small, portable, valuable objects. They wanted these creatures with them at all times.
Historians have decided that some of the finest works of art that have been found in Scythian tombs were possibly made by Greek artists, working with Scythian motifs for Scythian buyers. This comb, for example:
Or this pin with a griffin and sea-horse:
Or this scabbard:
That depicts animals hunting and a battle between Greeks and Scythians:
Or this necklace, which has even more going on:
The Scythians seem hard to know, but what they’ve left behind is stunning. They lived in a manner that seemed “uncivilized” to the Greeks — no writing, no cities, little farming — but they seem to have developed a sophisticated culture and excellent artistic abilities. 
How correct was Herodotus about them? We may never know for sure. But archaeologists [ https://substack.com/redirect/b55e2632-e997-4a38-b0e0-e186f32e3a17?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] have verified one of his stories. Herodotus tells us of their love for burning hemp, shouting for joy when they inhale the “vapours.” That story seems to be true — archaeologists have found cannabis residue (along with opium) in Scythian ritual sites.
This edition of the newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member, which gets you access to the archives and members-only posts:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93b3JsZGhpc3Rvcnkuc3Vic3RhY2suY29tL2FjdGlvbi9kaXNhYmxlX2VtYWlsP3Rva2VuPWV5SjFjMlZ5WDJsa0lqb3hORFUyTXpNeE9Td2ljRzl6ZEY5cFpDSTZNVGsxTVRneU1qRTRMQ0pwWVhRaU9qRTNPREkyTkRRMU1ESXNJbVY0Y0NJNk1UZ3hOREU0TURVd01pd2lhWE56SWpvaWNIVmlMVEk1TlRjeU5TSXNJbk4xWWlJNkltUnBjMkZpYkdWZlpXMWhhV3dpZlEucnFoYzFPZlN6WVp4NUlzS2cyQld0THZfZVAwQmppYlM2Vm15c1Njbk9GMCIsInAiOjE5NTE4MjIxOCwicyI6Mjk1NzI1LCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzgyNjQ0NTAyLCJleHAiOjIwOTgyMjA1MDIsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.fCSAFJVWn_ixNBBcjZoITJrXk3rSt2Be4kuHXLPwnpU?