Post       : Why is Singapore no longer &#8220;cool&#8221;?
URL        : https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2026/02/why-is-singapore-no-longer-cool.html
Posted     : February 9, 2026 at 1:02 am
Author     : Tyler Cowen
Categories : Current Affairs, Law, Political Science, Uncategorized

To be clear, I am not blaming Singapore on this one.  But it is striking to me how much Americans do not talk about Singapore any more.  They are much, much more likely to talk about Europe or England, for instance.  I see several reasons for this:

1. Much of the Singapore fascination came from the right-wing, as the country offered (according to some) a right-wing version of what a technocracy could look like.  Yet today's American political right is not very interested in technocracy.

2. Singapore willingly takes in large numbers of immigrants (in percentage terms), and tries to make that recipe work through a careful balancing act.  That approach still is popular with segments of the right-wing intelligentsia, but it is hardly on the agenda today.  For the time being, it is viewed as something "better not to talk about."  Especially in light of some of the burgeoning anti-Asian sentiment, for instance from Helen Andrews and some others.  It is much more common that Americans talk about foreign countries mismanaging their immigration policies, for instance the UK and Sweden.

3. Singaporean government looks and feels a bit like a "deep state."  I consider that terminology misleading as applied to Singapore, but still it makes it harder for many people to praise the place.

4. Singapore is a much more democratic country than most outsiders realize, though they do have an extreme form of gerrymandering.  Whatever you think of their system, these days it no longer feels transgressive, compared to alternatives being put into practice or at least being discussed.  Those alternatives range from more gerrymandering (USA) to various abrogations of democracy (potentially all over).  In this regard Singapore, without budging much on its own terms, seems like much more of a mainstream country than before.  That means there is less to talk about.

4b. Singapore's free speech restrictions, whatever you think of them, no longer seem so far outside the box.  Trump is suing plenty of people.  The UK is sending police to knock on people's doors for social media posts, and so on.  That too makes Singapore more of a "normal country," for better or worse (I would say worse).

5. The notion of an FDI-driven, MNE-driven growth strategy seems less exciting in an era of major tech advances, most of all AI.  Singapore seems further from the frontier than a few years ago.  People are wishing to talk about pending changes, not predictability, with predictability being a central feature of many Singaporean service exports.

6. If you want to talk about unusual, well-run small countries, UAE is these days a more novel case to consider, with more new news coming out of it.

Sorry Singapore, we are just not talking about you so much right now!  But perhaps, in some significant ways, that is a blessing in disguise.  At least temporarily.  I wrote this post in part because I realize I have not much blogged about Singapore for some years, and I was trying to figure out why.

Add a comment to this post: https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2026/02/why-is-singapore-no-longer-cool.html#respond

-- 


Manage Subscriptions
https://subscribe.wordpress.com/?key=3ba1653235661837fb9cfafd373444b6&email=ishan.mail%40gmail.com

Unsubscribe:
https://subscribe.wordpress.com/?key=3ba1653235661837fb9cfafd373444b6&email=ishan.mail%40gmail.com&b=bRnJDddexUXSknaIhWDKDjymhVQoTvCCSqO-v7k1YB9du-sZAq1zgLZfKZfz91LVsjrpH-_xFlEo7AMy8USibvUIGeuCK4VROr6-isoEZR6FNDAAKDIaE2FuEkRnSIhq7Xlq3W7CQYsAH-OVpb6dRUDPZWUOVyGl&oneclickunsubscribe=true
