View this post on the web at https://www.thepsmiths.com/p/review-aztecs-by-inga-clendinnen

Aztecs: An Interpretation [ https://substack.com/redirect/eb80de68-1428-4293-8e01-a4597a88d845?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], Inga Clendinnen (Cambridge University Press, 1991).
When Hernán Cortés landed in the New World, the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan was one of the greatest cities anywhere on earth. It had more than twice the population of Seville, and was (as my grade school history textbooks always nervously assured me) cleaner, more orderly, and more magnificent than any contemporaneous European city. Its ochre towers and pyramids rose like a dream from the shimmering waters of Lake Texcoco. Unlike the organic maze of alleyways that characterized most Spanish cities, Tenochtitlan’s public gardens and temple districts and grand processional ways were a product of the sort of high modernist urban planning that Europe wouldn’t really see until Haussmann’s Paris in the 19th century. The walls of the city shone with lime and were decorated with paintings, so it glimmered like a bauble in the Mexican sun. The soldiers who followed Cortés on the one hand described it as so ethereal it seemed the three causeways joining it to the mainland were anchors without which it might float away, but on the other hand were overawed by the towering height and hallucinatory bulk of the Great Pyramid topped with its twin temples to Huitzilopochtli and Tlaloc.  
In addition to being an architectural miracle, the city and the empire which fed it were also an economic and a social miracle. The Valley of Mexico has a dangerously irregular growing season, lacks crucial minerals, and is frequently subject to earthquakes, volcanoes, drought, and destructive floods. Despite such circumstances, hostile to any sort of economic surplus or capital accumulation [ https://substack.com/redirect/16580759-cacf-4d17-96d4-10349614d0c1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], the Aztecs (or more properly, as they called themselves, the ‘Mexica’) managed to create and maintain a complex social order which astonished the Spaniards with its state-run economic guilds, fine gradations of social hierarchy, and carefully mannered etiquette. The questions people usually ask given all of this are, “How did the Spaniards win? And how did they win so quickly and decisively?” I understand the allure of these questions, and why they have captured the imaginations of generations of historians and anthropologists. They are reasonable questions. But after reading Inga Clendinnen’s book I find I no longer have any interest in these questions, because all of my thought is bent towards another one: “Why didn’t God destroy the Aztecs sooner?”
In fairness, He did destroy them pretty quickly. The ancestors of the Mexica wandered into the fertile basin that was to become their empire sometime in the late 1200s or early 1300s. They found it already settled with a mosaic of mostly Nahuatl-speaking city-states, and spent a few decades as mercenaries or tributaries for various stronger powers. One of those petty wars went badly, and they finally settled down as bedraggled refugees on the muck-covered islands that were to be the site of their future glory. Within a hundred years they were the most powerful city in the valley. Fifty years after that they were the unquestioned hegemon and begin to launch wars of imperial expansion towards the Pacific and Caribbean coasts. Another fifty years of imperial glory, and then they were destroyed utterly. Or as Clendinnen puts it, “a man whose grandfather had fought as a hireling in another city’s wars in the Mexica’s early days in the valley would himself have seen the glory of their achieved empire, and his son watched its destruction.” 
None of this would have come as a surprise to the Mexica. Their entire cosmology revolved around the absolute precarity of the world, and they believed that all earthly things were balanced on a knife’s edge between ravenous abyssal powers on one side and the emptiness of the void on the other. Every fifty-two years the entire nation waited breathlessly at the ceremony of the New Fire to see whether the world would continue or not. On a lonely hill outside of the city, senior priests feverishly worked a hand drill upon the naked breast of a bound captive. If the gods sent fire, it meant the world was saved, and the victim’s chest was immediately torn open so that the flame could be fed with his heart and flesh, bubbling and growing within the chest cavity to the relieved cheers of the populace before being carried to the major temples of the city. Everybody knew that if the fire did not come, the world would slip into nothingness and stop existing. Before we are tempted to roll our eyes at this and ask how suspenseful it really could have been, remember that they only got to do it three or four times between the foundation of their empire and its extinction.
That empire was not gentle. Few empires are, but even by the sad standards of human history, the Mexica were extreme. I’m not speaking here about their legendarily creative and inventive ways of humiliating subject peoples, I’m speaking about the human sacrifices. No, these were not exaggerated by the colonizers, as some revisionist historians would have you believe. If anything, the Spaniards lacked the conceptual framework to fully comprehend the industrial-scale, ever-so-civilized and bureaucratic evil of the Mexica, and so they inadvertently downplayed it. The reality, as Clendinnen brilliantly documents, is that human sacrifice was not an occasional or incidental religious custom for the Mexica, like an extra-spicy church service for the people who only show up on Christmas or Easter. No, the mass-butchery of wailing, pleading captives of both sexes and all ages was the core activity around which their entire civilization and society revolved. Their art, their music, their poetry, their approach to warfare, their entire economic system, their kaleidoscopic array of holidays and festivals, all were singularly dedicated to the killing (often preceded by inventive torture) of helpless human beings. And everybody had their role to play:
The killings were not remote top-of-the pyramid affairs. If only high priests and rulers killed, they carried out most of their butchers’ work en plein air, and not only in the main temple precinct, but in the neighborhood temples and on the streets. The people were implicated in the care and preparation of the victims, their delivery to the place of death, and then in the elaborate processing of the bodies: the dismemberment and distribution of heads and limbs, flesh and blood and flayed skins. On high occasions warriors carrying gourds of human blood or wearing the dripping skins of their captives ran through the streets, to be ceremoniously welcomed into the dwellings; the flesh of their victims seethed in domestic cooking pots; human thighbones, scraped and dried, were set up in the courtyards of households — and all this among a people notable for a precisely ordered polity, a grave formality of manner, and a developed regard for beauty.
The scale of it boggles the mind. The Mexica record with pride a single festal occasion on which over twenty thousand victims were sacrificed, the blood rolling in a slow curtain down the steps of the pyramids as four lines of manacled slaves trudged along the great processional ways towards their doom. It was the job of special priests to greet the captives as they entered the city and to explain in detail the honor that was to await them. And it was always human beings. Many primitive cultures have practiced forms of animal sacrifice. The Mexica were neither primitive, nor interested in animals. There was also no “othering” at work here. The Mexica knew that they were killing people who thought and felt and dreamed and loved as they did. Indeed, that was the entire point of it. They constructed an efficient and well-run machine that had as its sole purpose delivering living, breathing, conscious and informed human beings to the killing-stone or the furnace. A whole battery of sophisticated psychological techniques were employed to ensure the compliance of the victims to the end. Yes, the Spaniards lacked the vocabulary to describe it, but we who live in the aftermath of the twentieth century do not.
Clendinnen writes: “It is the combination of violence with apparent impersonality, the bureaucratic calculation of these elaborated Mexica brutalities, together with their habituated and apparently casual incorporation into the world of the everyday, which chills.” And it’s obvious that she’s thinking of the Holocaust. Indeed, of all the twentieth-century genocides that one still holds a special horror because its perpetrators were not uneducated peasants and yokels but mannered men with a taste for Beethoven and Brahms. Reading Clendinnen’s descriptions of the Mexica — their beautiful art, their subtle religious debates, their gleaming city — gives one much the same feeling. Indeed, Clendinnen herself is simultaneously won over by their charms and also a little bit horrified at her own response. She writes like one of those women who fall in love with serial killers. And come to think of it, the Mexica are a little bit like a serial killer in societal form, with the full panoply of Dark Triad [ https://substack.com/redirect/16b65222-7513-4045-b32c-8355b5e27470?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] personality characteristics on display: witty, charming, charismatic, sadistic, utterly devoid of empathy. They are so far out of distribution, I had no idea a culture like this could exist. How did they get this way?
There’s a cliché phrase beloved of twentieth century American conservatives: “Ideas have consequences.” For the most part, this blog has emphasized the opposite. At times we’ve taken an almost quasi-Marxist [ https://substack.com/redirect/07f93a0b-4b4c-4367-ba30-bb8a3d0a24c2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] tone when unpacking the ways in which material conditions and technological constraints create the deep substrate of social dark matter that shapes your activities, your preferences, and your very self-conception in ways you cannot see. Of course, this is not a one-directional causal chain, and this is what Marx got wrong. Culture and belief are themselves a form of technology [ https://substack.com/redirect/696bd665-d849-4ed2-879b-c85db0a64313?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that can loop back and create material conditions, and real social history is driven by the complex interplay between the two. And yet that phrase, “ideas have consequences,” it haunts me now. I don’t think I realized just how dark its implications were until I read about the Mexica. 
Aztec cosmology, philosophy, and religion are a type of cosmic horror [ https://substack.com/redirect/af2a3b08-b7bb-4776-a7fd-8a3e53a6f145?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] avant la lettre. If you’re unfamiliar with cosmic horror, it’s a genre of speculative fiction that features humanity as an utterly insignificant speck within a cold and uncaring universe filled with inconceivably powerful and inscrutable entities. These godlike beings have as much concern for mankind and all of its works as you do for an amoeba living on an anthill that you accidentally kick over. The genre mixes a healthy dose of existential dread into all of its imaginings — everything we know and care about is like the film of a soap bubble that could pop at any moment, or worse, could become the plaything of something infinitely old and infinitely cruel. 
Most people think the genre was codified by Howard Phillips Lovecraft [ https://substack.com/redirect/c920d000-7b09-4e3c-afa3-daf5d275144c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] in the early twentieth century, but they’re wrong: it was codified by the Mexica in the thirteenth or fourteenth century. We’ve already covered the Mexica belief that the universe might wink out of existence at any moment. When it came to the gods, some of them were actively malevolent (and much ritual action went into trying to maintain the frail membrane between our world and theirs), but most of them were just casually and inadvertently destructive — especially the ones associated with natural forces. They went about their business with as much mind for human affairs as human beings have for flies, and in doing so would cause enormous upheavals and disasters as a matter of course. 
If a god is rampaging through your backyard and about to destroy the solar system, you may wish to redirect it. The problem was it was astonishingly hard to get the attention of these gods…but there were ways… Imagine being an ant and trying to get a person’s attention. It would be hard, unless you put on the most magnificent and over-the-top ant spectacle ever. And it turned out that the gods were especially sensitive to fear and pain, hence the daily offerings of blood made by every adult Mexica, and hence the grotesque self-mutilations performed on holy festival days:
After the invocation of the god and the offering of incense, the priests had their tongues pierced by obsidian blades, and then drew through the slit a sequence of rods of wood, varying in thickness, we are told, from a thumb to ‘the space one can encircle with the thumb and forefinger’. Senior priests were committed to forcing four hundred and five rods through their tongues, and the more junior two hundred. This exercise initiated an eighty-day fast, with the forcing of the rods through the tongue repeated every twenty days. (It is painful to imagine that deliberate breaking-open of the barely healed flesh.) For the second eighty-day fast it was the turn of the common people, who imitated the priestly sacrifice at a less heroic level, being content to draw through their tongues ‘little rods as thick as duck’s quill’… There were other even more strenuous exercises, as, for example, the slitting of the penis and the passing through the slit of a rope some fathoms long…
But usually even that was not enough. Imagine a god like Tlaloc, who brought the rains. Tlaloc’s moods were impossible to predict, but if he decided to be somewhere else for a while the result would be a devastating drought. No, it was important to be very certain that Tlaloc could hear you: 
…small children [were] offered to Tlaloc over the first months of the ritual calendar… The children were kept by the priests for some weeks before their deaths (those kindergartens of doomed infants are difficult to contemplate). Then, as the appropriate festivals arrived, they were magnificently dressed, paraded in litters, and, as they wept, their throats were slit: gifted to Tlaloc the Rain God… The pathos of their fate as they were paraded moved the watchers to tears, while their own tears were thought to augur rain… the onlookers wept as the children destined for Tlaloc… were carried weeping in their litters, and wept as the terrified wailing choked and stopped.
The reader may note, perhaps with growing alarm, that we have not yet even gotten to the step pyramids, the mass sacrifices of captives, the heart excisions, and the towering racks of skulls. No, this is what you have to understand: that particular grotesque mass-butchery, which has come to dominate Aztec representations in popular culture, was actually just one narrow dimension of Mexica religion and culture. But they’re all like that, or somehow worse. Clendinnen will be describing some totally random aspect of life among the Mexica, like the salt-gatherers say, and then casually note in passing that “the death of ‘Salt Lady’ graphically represented the work of the salt-farmers who offered her: bent sharply backwards over the stone, a swordfish blade at her throat so that her body was tensely arched, her breast struck open so that the blood jetted and boiled up like their boiling vats.” Every bit of their society was like this, combining brutal killing with a certain showiness and flair for the dramatic. Their nicest gods had names like “the Flayed Lord” and countless gruesome rituals were performed to keep him away. There was nothing special about the mass sacrifices atop the pyramids, they were just one of the gaudiest and costliest [ https://substack.com/redirect/47766609-179b-4dbb-9099-4dbc122a33b4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] outgrowths of a sensibility that pervaded Mexica society.
There’s a reason so many resources (slaves) went into the pyramid sacrifices, though: they were the preserve of Huitzilopochtli, the war god, patron of the Mexica warrior cult to which every man theoretically belonged from the moment of his birth. As soon as a male infant emerged from the womb, the midwife would utter war-cries and then as the umbilical cord was severed she would pronounce the following blessing:
My precious son, my youngest one… heed, harken: thy home is not here, for thou art an eagle, thou art an ocelotl… here is only the place of they nest… Thou belongest out there: out there thou hast been consecrated. Thou hast been sent into warfare. War is they desert, thy task. Thou shalt give drink, nourishment, food to the sun, the lord of the earth. Thy real home, thy lot is the home of the sun there in the heavens. Perhaps thou wilt receive the gift, perhaps thou wilt merit death by the obsidian knife.
The umbilical cord was entrusted to a veteran warrior who would bury it on a battlefield. The baby was addressed as a “little captive” and at his naming ceremony the neighborhood boys were recruited to stage a fake triumph in imitation of those that accompanied noble prisoners being led into the city to the killing stone. Every bit of ceremony surrounding the birth of a baby boy was designed to reinforce one thing to the shaken, post-partum, emotionally and physically vulnerable mother: “This boy is not yours. He belongs to the state. He was made for warfare. He is a resource. He will die young, violently, in a faraway place.” Prior to the advent of twentieth century totalitarianism, I cannot think of another society that thought to challenge the bond between mother and newborn like this. Most of us see the image of a woman with a babe at her breast and see in it the ultimate rebuke to kings and priests, we see something primordial, something older and more powerful than any claim to authority made by mere men. Not so for the Mexica.
The world these boys were being prepared for was a brutal one. There’s a recurring temptation, baked deep into our worldview here in the enlightened West, to think that every society is basically the same. It’s partly condescension, partly ideological allergy to anything that could even tangentially imply that some people are better than others, and partly because for the Starbucks-and-airport-lounges class [ https://substack.com/redirect/62dae22d-5e39-4608-8a5f-74330ee9b254?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] all societies actually do look pretty much the same. This tendency is so universal, so much the water we all swim in, it can be easy to miss. But you see it any time you’re chatting with somebody about the interesting historical fact that some people had savage custom X, and they nervously interject, “well, of course we also do Y.” The odd thing is that people do it even when X and Y are very different things, which would seem to undercut their argument, but they say it anyway because they are so desperate to restore some sort of karmic balance. Less prosaically, you also see it in our assumption that Iraq would turn into a flourishing democracy [ https://substack.com/redirect/1ff2a307-864a-44bb-b404-e546e5221cd7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] and that China would adopt American power structures [ https://substack.com/redirect/7d7cd036-ee7d-4526-bb3c-e8322c1b2280?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] merely because it joined our trade empire. Yes, both the left and the right here hold this belief deep in their bones, which is why it’s so easy not to notice it.
Clendinnen has no time for any of this. She knows that of course, as soon as she starts talking about human sacrifices some lib is going to bring up medieval European public executions and judicial torture, and she bristles at it: “Such events were relatively infrequent, and certainly peripheral to the dailiness of life, while their victims, however pitiable, could be seen as culpable to some degree… Mexica victims were purely victims.” Well, it wasn’t just the sacrificial victims. Mexica society’s treatment of people in general was very different from anything to which we’re accustomed: “Public physical humiliation and extreme violence is used economically in most polities, and against the prestigious rarely and as a last resort: in Tenochtitlan it was used extravagantly, publicly, and as a first resort.” Much of the education of the Mexica child was designed to prepare them for this future by giving them a taste of it. As soon as they were weaned (more about Mexica babies in a moment) they would be subjected to discipline that was physical, immediate, and savage. The abuse had a purpose beyond preparing children to face society; it also prepared them to face the gods. The Mexica brought their characteristic fatalism to child-rearing as to everything else. Faced with the bleakness of reality, the only true tenderness was to toughen up a boy so that he could bear the existential weight of it. 
Beyond a certain age, the family could not be trusted to carry out that toughening process properly, and so all Mexica boys were removed from their families and placed in special schools. The two main types of school that Clendinnen covers are the warrior schools and the priest schools. In theory, every Mexica man was a warrior and an initiate in the cult of Huitzilopochtli, so everybody started out in warrior school, and then some people stuck around and specialized while others transferred to other occupations. One can imagine what these schools were like from this exhortation given to a boy six years old:
O my son, O my grandson. See to it that thou lookest not longingly to thy home, to something within thy home. Do not say: ‘My mother is there, my father is there. My neighbours, my protectors, exist, flourish… I have drink, I have food. I came to life, I was born, at the place of abundance, a place of riches.’ It is ended; thou goest knowing it. 
The main thing that’s noteworthy about these schools, besides their brutality, is how absolutely obsessed with individual performance and how anti-teamwork they were. Success in the schools was zero sum. Whether in physical challenges, social competition, or the scrum of combat itself, you could only succeed and rise if your peers failed. Priest school worked much the same way, but even more surreal — a priest was expected to have perfect poise, and so the boys would be tested on their ability to place small round objects in very precise locations after enduring days of starvation, constant plunges in cold water so their hands would shake, and horrifying bodily mortification. One of the duties of those who succeeded was to punish the failures, publicly humiliate them, and expel them from the school. In this way, the lesson was drummed home that one man’s rise meant another’s fall.
This same zero-sum competition extended to the Mexica army, which as soon as battle was joined became not an army but a swirling melee of individual glory-seekers. The purpose of the Mexica warrior was not the victory of the group, but competition with his peers, and the way to win the competition was to secure captives for sacrifice to Huitzilopochtli. This singular fact drove almost everything about Mexica combat strategy, or the lack thereof. Great warriors wore towering feather headdresses to attract opponents so that they could be disabled and sacrificed. The Mexica had projectile weapons, but specifically designed them to be non-lethal and only employed them for demoralization. The Mexica wielded long, shallow obsidian blades and flint-studded clubs that were designed to incapacitate by cutting a hamstring or crushing a knee, rather than to kill. The only way to advance as a Mexica warrior was to sacrifice more captives than your peers, and the incentives of the system shaped everything else. So long as their only opponents were the brutalized members of smaller neighboring tribes it all continued to work, but I think this odd approach to combat almost entirely explains their extreme underperformance on meeting the Spanish.
What of the women? The midwife’s traditional injunction to a newborn baby girl reads a little differently than “thou art an ocelotl”:
Thou wilt be in the heart of the home, thou wilt go nowhere, thou wilt nowhere become a wanderer, thou becomest the banked fire, the hearth stones. Here our lord planteth thee, burieth thee. And thou wilt become fatigued, thou wilt become tired, thou art to provide water, to grind maize, to drudge; thou art to sweat by the ashes, by the hearth. [The umbilical cord was then buried by the hearth.]
And indeed, the social role of the Mexica woman was fundamentally private and domestic. Barring a few exceptional cases (priestesses of female deities, the state-sanctioned guild of prostitutes, and female sacrificial victims) the life and training of a Mexica girl was oriented towards marriage. Once she had become a wife, she would take over the management of the household, and perhaps she would operate a domestic manufactory. She would drudge. She would toil. Not for her the glory of politics or of combat or of mediating with the gods on behalf of humanity. Hers was a life in secret, out of view, always in the background. But in a society as dominated by the warrior ethos as that of the Mexica, even a housewife [ https://substack.com/redirect/312e914a-75bc-4f88-bff0-fda94e0d377e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] could find an opportunity for glory. Clendinnen offers us this Mexica poem about childbirth:
Is this not a fatal time for us poor women?
This is our kind of war
There our Mother
Cihuacoatl Quilaztli
Takes her tribute of death.
Followed by this reflection:
‘Our kind of war’. To consider the process of parturition as mortal combat rather than as labour is to colour the experience most profoundly. If the woman ‘labours’ in childbed, the metaphor assumes she remains responsible and in control of a familiar, if intensified, activity, to which she must apply discipline, energy, and effort. That account minimizes what is in experience the extraordinary sensation of the body being invaded and shaken by a quite unfamiliar force, as normally quiescent muscles clench and relax. During the process of birth women were and were seen to be abducted from their usual gentle domesticities, and (given the Mexica sense of battle as being overwhelmed by the force of Huitzilopochtli) to be ‘possessed’ by some great presence beyond the self… The magnificent squatting image of the Mexica goddess of childbirth, naked, solitary in the ecstasy of total effort, does not represent a woman in ‘labour’. Here we look upon the face of battle. If men challenged the death anguish on the jaguar meadow of war, women confronted it on the bloody field of childbirth.
If men were possessed by Huitzilopochtli in combat, and after meeting death on the battlefield or the killing-stone were reincarnated as hummingbirds, then what kind of force came over a woman in childbirth, and what kind of being would she become if she succumbed on its “bloody field”? This leads us to another whole category of Mexica cosmology, somehow darker and more awful than anything we’ve encountered yet. You see, there are the “gods” as in the celestial beings that are not of this world — remote, unconcerned, casually destructive. But there is another category of “gods” that are as bound to the earth as humanity is; they are the lords of the earth, and they will die with the earth. What distinguished the earth lords was their nightmarish hunger. In all the Mexica creation myths there is strife in heaven (this mirrors their social arrangements — one must fall that another may rise). The earth deities are cast out, or torn asunder, or flayed, or dismembered. But they are gods. They cannot die. And so they linger here, bound to the earth, broken and bleeding, their metaphysical mutilation morphing into an eternal hunger that can never be filled. For example Cihuacoatl:
The most notable feature of the goddess Cihuacoatl was her gaping mouth and ferocious teeth… Cihuacoatl’s priests solicited a captive from the ruler every eight days to feed their famished mistress, one torn thigh being returned to the captor as what remained when the goddess was temporarily sated.
The earth gods came in all different shapes and forms, and they filled the interstices of the Mexica myth-world. At the top of the pyramid of Huitzilopochtli captives had their hearts torn out for his glory, but at the base of the pyramid was an image of his outraged older sister and victim, the earth goddess Coyolxauhqui, eyes closed in death, bones jutting from torn flesh, but fanged mouth wide open and eternally hungering for the plundered corpses flung down the stone steps. Less grandiose was the terrible phantom ‘Night Axe’, a “headless torso scuttling along the ground, its split chest opening, then shutting with the dull ‘chunk’ of an axe blow heard in the night.” (The Mexica believed that a man who encountered Night Axe and reached into its gaping wound could pluck out the signs of his individual fate.) 
The earth lords were vindictive and sadistic, and much of Aztec ceremony — the daily offerings of blood, the human hearts pulped into stone mouths — was designed to temporarily satisfy their hunger and keep them at bay. But unfortunately they could not be avoided. In fact, the entire structure of earthly life conspired to interweave human destiny with that of the earth gods. As lords of the earth, the fruits of the earth belonged to them, and by ingesting those gifts every human being entered into involuntary servitude to these beings. Agriculture, the systematic extraction of the flesh of the gods, was a metaphysically dangerous game to play. Through agriculture, humanity entered into a desperate plight [ https://substack.com/redirect/bbf0c882-c34e-4faf-81d0-ac4943c61dc9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], a debt that could never be repaid except through death. Humankind could only be sustained if the gods were fed in return: 
For our tribute is death; [it is] awarded us in common as merited. And on earth there prevaileth the coming to pay the tribute of death. For there will be the following after, the approaching to thy progenitor Mictlan tecutli [Death Lord]… who remains unsatiated, who remaineth coveting. He remaineth thirsting there for us, hungering there for us, panting there for us.
This is why for the Mexica, the moment of weaning was the single most important event of a person’s life. A baby who had only ever suckled at his or her mother’s breast was free, mercifully free, from the human condition. If you died before weaning, your spirit would return to the warm garden of Tonacatecutli to suck upon one of the innumerable breasts of the ‘Wet-Nurse Tree.’ Weaning would irrevocably and destructively alter a child’s relationship with the gods — as soon as they had taken the plants of the earth into their mouth, the child was flung into a total and involuntary obligation to the ravening spirits of the earth, an obligation that could be paid for only with one’s flesh and death. The Mexica were some of the original ecological thinkers, in that they recognized all human life and civilization as just a transient stage in the natural cycle of vegetable growth, decomposition, fertilization, and regrowth. But unlike their ideological descendants, the Mexica savored the bleak reality and existential dread that the phrase “circle of life” ought to connote.
Women had an especially close connection to the earth deities, because the fertile womb that brought forth children was obviously tied to the fertile earth bringing forth maize and beans, in an endless cycle of which human life was but one temporary stage. The terrible presence that overcame women in childbirth, as men were possessed by Huitzilopochtli on the battlefield, was Cihuacoatl — she of the gaping mouth, the ferocious teeth, the endless hunger. The mere shadow of her presence could injure any living thing, so even in the case of a normal birth, great care was taken that visitors to the household in the days that followed should ward themselves against her influence. But if a woman died in childbirth, in the “fatal time for us poor women… our kind of war,” then the dark power of Cihuacoatl would suffuse her body and extreme measures had to be taken. The corpse could not be removed from the house by the doorway, but instead the mourners would break open a back wall and remove it in the dead of the night. The husband would carry the corpse, escorted by a party of old women and midwives, to bury it at a crossroads. There he would keep vigil for four days as the magical power slowly dispersed, fending off any grave-robbers desperate to seize a fragment of her flesh for use in potions or talismans. After he departed, leaving no marker or indication at the place, she would be reborn as a “Celestial Princess” or a “Devil Woman” — a malevolent spirit, eternally angry, haunting the peripheral places and inimical to all life but especially to children. The Celestial Princesses caused birth defects and deformities, struck down teenagers with convulsions or illness, and when at some future New Fire ceremony the sun should fail and the world should end, it was they who would lead the ravening horde of earth powers to destroy the world.
The kindest of the earth gods was Toci, the patroness of female social and domestic activities. I’ll close this section by just quoting from Clendinnen’s description of her main festival:
The festival of the eleventh month, Ochpaniztli, the ‘Sweeping of the Roads’… was devoted to Toci, ‘Our Grandmother’, perhaps the most inclusive of the many names given to the earth powers. The primary referent of the ‘sweeping’ was to the rush of the winds before the brief winter rains. The rains marked the end of the season of growth and the beginning of the agricultural harvest, and the first flowering of the season of war.
…The solemnity of Ochpaniztli was marked off from the earlier exuberance by a five-day lull in all ritual action. Then, late in the afternoon of the sixth day, in silence, and in carefully ordered ranks, the warriors performed a slow, formal march, their hands filled with flowering branches. The formal patterning was sustained until the sun was well set. So they continued over eight days, with that ordered silent marching in the last light of the sun.
Then the pace changed with the eruption into action of the midwives and women physicians, all the women wearing the sacred tobacco pouch as the sign of their sacerdotal status. Divided into two bands, women surged back and forth in a play-skirmish; pelting each other with flowers, reeds and mossy tree-parasites moulded into balls. The group led by the three major officebearers of the curers’ association swept along with them the bedecked ixiptla of Teteo Innan, ‘Mother of the Sacred Ones’: patroness of midwives, curers, the marketplace traders and of things domestic, and closely allied with Chicomecoatl, or ‘Sustenance Woman’. The doomed woman was teased and diverted; should she weep it was thought that many stillbirths and the deaths of great warriors would follow.
For four days the normally sedate women skirmished before the House of Song in the main temple precinct, the contest swaying in the pursuit-and-attack alternation enacted in the ballgame, and which for the Mexica was inscribed in the heavens. (The victim so mercilessly played with must have been close to hysteria as exhaustion and excitement mounted.) On the fifth day towards sundown Teteo Innan was brought to the marketplace, her women still encircling her, to be greeted by the priests of Chicomecoatl, and for the last time walked through her marketplace, scattering maizemeal as she went. For the last few hours of her life she was taken back to ‘her’ temple, and there adorned and arrayed. In the thick of the night, in silence and darkness, she was hurried to the pyramid of the Maize Lord, and stretched on the back of a priest. They were placed ‘shoulder to shoulder’, we are told, so she was probably looking up into the night sky when her head was struck off. Then, still in darkness, silence, and urgent haste, her body was flayed, and a naked priest, a ‘very strong man, very powerful, very tall’, struggled into the wet skin, with its slack breasts and pouched genitalia: a double nakedness of layered, ambiguous sexuality. The skin of one thigh was reserved to be fashioned into a face-mask for the man impersonating Centeotl, Young Lord Maize Cob, the son of Toci.
From this point on the priest in his skin had become and was named ‘Toci’. “She” came swiftly and silently down the steps of the pyramid, her priests closely behind her… As the sun rose Toci was illuminated standing silent on the platform of her temple. Below the nobles were again assembled. As the sun strengthened they ran up the steps to adorn her: to place over the tautening skin her shift and painted skirt, to apply the eagle-down of the warrior to her legs and head, to paint her face, while others offered incense and quail before her. Then her priests decked her in her paper regalia and her great bannered headdress. At last fully accoutred, she slew four captives flung down in turn on the offering stone, but she left the rest of the killings to her priests. as she took her son back to the Temple of Huitzilopochtli to initiate the season of war.
[…]
At the skull rack in the main temple precinct the seasoned warriors were waiting to receive Lord Maize Cob, ‘The Man of War’, and to carry his thigh-skin mask as a challenge into enemy lands. So the path of war was opened. The challenge dispatched, Toci proceeded to Atempan, where the whole military might of Tenochtitlan, now ranked and in careful order, awaited her coming… The warriors then began a slow circling of the pyramid in the dance which had ushered in Toci’s festival, but this time they paraded ‘in glory’, and carried weapons instead of the flowery branches of the ritual’s first days. On the next day the greatest nobles were awarded their insignia, with Moctezoma himself leading them in the slow-stepping dance, and the warriors, now glorious with their quetzal-plume panaches and deeply glinting gold, moving in full magnificence: ‘for a great distance did they scintillate; much did the devices gleam.’
The dancing, with its eerie counterpoint of song, continued until sundown. When it ceased the priests of ‘Sustenance Woman’, clad in the skins of others who had died when Toci was born, came forth from their temple… They scattered as they ran, until finally she ran on alone, save for a few priests who attended her back to her shrine on the boundary of the city. There “Toci’ removed the regalia, and peeled off the shrivelling skin. It was stretched on a wooden frame, face forward and staring outwards, to guard the city which had once again been brought to acknowledge the range and weight of Toci’s authority.
Ochpaniztli had powerful historical and mythic connotations. Dramatically and experientially it was a brilliantly constructed horror event, in its abrupt changes of pace and its teasing of the imagination through the exploitation of darkness, the sudden rush of feet, the whisper of brooms sodden with human blood, as in the deliberation of the slow construction of Toci, built layer by layer upon the flayed human skin, each layer revealing more of her nature, until the benign custodian of curing and the domestic stood triumphant as the pitiless mistress of war, insatiable eater of men.
So much for the earth gods. But in the great sweep of Mexica religion, there was one more being who fit neither with the indifferent and aloof celestials that devastated humanity with natural disasters out of sheer disinterest, nor with the bound and mutilated earth lords to whom one’s life was owed as soon as one had tasted maize gruel. There was one entity who broke the pattern. He stood above and outside the world, but the world was a place of exile and danger precisely because he held it within his hand. Tezcatlipoca. “The Lord of the Here and Now.” Tezcatlipoca. “The Enemy on Both Sides.” If the other celestials were lumbering giants who occasionally kicked over the anthill that was the earth, Tezcatlipoca was a sadistic child with a magnifying glass. Tezcatlipoca was intensely interested in the doings of men, and the Mexica cowered under his gaze and prayed for it to pass them by. Tezcatlipoca’s laughter signaled total destruction, and of Tezcatlipoca it was said: “He only mocketh. Of no-one can he be a friend, to no-one true.” His other names were Moyocoyatzin, ‘Capricious Creator’, Titlacahuan, ‘He Whose Slaves We Are’, and Moquequeloa, ‘The Mocker’. He was fickleness personified, his will was utterly unpredictable and implacable, and he delighted in elevating a man, making him virtuous, rich, and proud, and then suddenly and inexplicably destroying him. Tezcatlipoca was the god of kings and earthly rulership. Tezcatlipoca was also the god of slaves, who were known as ‘beloved sons of Tezcatlipoca.’ This was not out of some pseudo-Christian “last shall be first” beatitude, but because “their calamitous position dramatized the pure arbitrariness of individual destiny.”
The influence of Tezcatlipoca pervaded every bit of Mexica society. Good fortune must always be accepted warily, because more than likely it was the setup to a cruel joke by Tezcatlipoca. Young mothers were cautioned not to be too pleased with their babies, lest the Lord of the Here and Now notice and destroy the child. Bouquets of flowers were to be sniffed “only at the outer edges: the swooning sweetness at the centre belonged not to men but to Tezcatlipoca… We are all slaves of Tezcatlipoca, ‘He Whose Slaves We Are’, victims of the giant unpredictability of the world.” The will of Tezcatlipoca was also made manifest in the brutal, public torture and execution of a warrior or priest who stumbled: “his warrior regalia stripped from him, his scalp lock shorn, his heart excised, his emptied body broken into its parts and dispersed to be eaten… That looming reality cast its shadow back over the adulation, the triumphs, to reveal the desperate fragility of the… seasoned warrior. Endless striving, the endless, anxious, making of the self and then the reversal: the sudden, massive, physical assault by one’s peers in punishment for some perhaps unintended, possibly involuntary delict; the merchant, all payments made, deprived of his reward; the priest cast out; the great warrior shamed…. the threat was always there.” Tezcatlipoca.
The great festival of Tezcatlipoca was called Toxcatl, and it is instructive. A young male slave was chosen for his beauty, then adorned with jewelry and fine clothing, crowned, decked with flowers and paraded through the streets. For an entire year he was addressed as ‘Tezcatlipoca,’ given pride of place at every banquet, feted, always preceded through the streets by an entourage playing flutes, and provided any sort of sexual gratification he desired. For the final five days in his role as the god, ‘Tezcatlipoca’ literally ruled the city: the king secluding himself away while the slave danced and celebrated in his palace and in the most sacred zones of the temples. On the final day before the next Toxcatl, he took a canoe to a small island to meet the knives of the waiting priests. “As the old Tezcatlipoca died, his heart cut out, his head skewered on the skull rack, the flutes of the new Tezcatlipoca were heard in the streets of the city.” To understand the rites of Toxcatl is to comprehend the nature of Tezcatlipoca, for:
The artificially glorious, artificially brief parabola of his ritual life displayed what it was to live in a world ruled by Tezcatlipoca, the deity of human destiny… whose nature is perfectly realized in the destruction of his servitor at the pinnacle of honour and social bliss. Toxcatl carried a dark undertext of social prestige as fiction; of the power of men to make this perfect thing, and destroy and replicate it at will. It also spoke, more deeply, of the desperate fragility besetting experience itself; of the evanescence not only of man-made things, but of beauty, pride and desire; of the impenetrable, inexhaustible fickleness of Tezcatlipoca… the anguish of powerless dependence, the constancy of insecurity, the painful insubstantiality of status and reward in the imperial city of Tenochtitlan, and the casual, inventive, tireless malice of the only sacred force concerned with the fates of men.
It tells us something about Mexica political theory that this wanton, sadistic, fundamentally antisocial god was the patron of kingship and rightful rule. The Mexica king was sometimes referred to as the ‘flute’ of Tezcatlipoca, for the voice of the god spoke through him when he elevated one man with honor and riches and just as casually destroyed another. The royal court that lay before the throne of the king was called ‘the slippery place’, because when presented there one teetered on the brink of annihilation. When a new king was elevated, he stood for hours, naked, before the image of Tezcatlipoca, where it was believed that his body was invaded by the god. When the new king returned from his ordeal to address the people, his genuflecting nobles addressed him as “our lord, our executioner, and our enemy.”
Long ago, Scott Alexander asked us [ https://substack.com/redirect/7a94f828-43b2-4c63-99af-0c7a62fcdb63?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] to imagine a dystopia:
Imagine a country with two rules: first, every person must spend eight hours a day giving themselves strong electric shocks. Second, if anyone fails to follow a rule (including this one), or speaks out against it, or fails to enforce it, all citizens must unite to kill that person. Suppose these rules were well-enough established by tradition that everyone expected them to be enforced.
This thought experiment has stuck with me ever since I read it. I think of it whenever I encounter a system that everybody hates but everybody is powerless to change, or some other stuck equilbrium or multipolar trap. When I first read it, the society he described sounded contrived and outlandish, but later I was to learn from my dear wife that the real world is far more outlandish than that thought experiment [ https://substack.com/redirect/aafabd0c-1065-4621-baad-964684e8cea6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. The thing is that each of the societies chronicled in that book Jane reviewed is very small, very primitive, and very dysfunctional. What is so disturbing about the Mexica is that they were large, sophisticated, and oh-so-terribly functional. The streets of Tenochtitlan, as my elementary school textbooks told me, were wider and more beautiful than those of Paris or Seville. Their art, music, and poetry were sublime, their theology was subtle, and their intellectual life was vibrant. The Mexica would seem horrifying to us if they were barbarians. But I think they should be more horrifying precisely because they were not.
Neither of the two main popular imaginings of the Aztecs gets them right. On the one hand you have the right-wingers who dismiss them as bloodthirsty savages. On the other hand you have the left-wingers who defend them as cruelly misunderstood victims of Spanish colonialism. That latter impulse is what results in videos like this one, an AI-enabled imagining of Tenochtitlan in 2026 if the Mexica had fended off their conquerors:
What’s remarkable about this video is that it’s more of an act of colonialism than anything the Spanish ever did. The Tenochtitlan it imagines is just Brooklyn but with step pyramids. Everything distinctive and disturbing has been airbrushed away, a kind of cultural erasure more profound than any book-burning, and no less destructive because it was born out of a patronizing condescension rather than out of indignation. It imagines the Mexica, as the victors, adopting our worldview and norms whole-cloth. This is because it cannot imagine anything outside of itself. In this way, the video stands as a fitting representative of the entire twenty-first century cosmopolitan mindset, which celebrates foreign cultures the way the priest of Toci celebrates femininity, by flaying them and wearing their skins.
To really grapple with the Aztecs is to experience a sort of vertigo every bit as disorienting and nauseating as cosmic horror itself. Just as the works of Lovecraft and Mexica religion both hold that we occupy a small and insignificant corner of the cosmos, perhaps every human society that we have seen or experienced makes up just a tiny sliver of the possibility space of human organization. Perhaps the Mexica themselves are part of that tiny sliver, and out there in the modal logic æther are stable, flourishing civilizations more bizarre than anything we can imagine. Perhaps the world and all of its cultures are like a false vacuum, and perhaps one day with a pop we will slip into the basin of a different attractor, perhaps one that is the stuff of nightmares. If the essential conservative insight is that things can always get worse, then it’s funny that conservatives often fail to imagine just how much worse things might get. The nine most frightening words in the English language might be “the distribution of possible human societies is very wide.”
These are not comforting thoughts to hold in mind at a time when our whole culture, propelled by an unprecedented technological breakthrough, rockets towards some uncharted corner of that distribution. So I’ll let Clendinnen bring us back to the Mexica and end with her closing remarks in this strange love letter of a book to an even stranger people:
What the rituals finally and most powerfully represented was a vision subversive of human distinctions, with all the elegancies and elaborations of the social order collapsed into the carnal indifference of death… trussed like deer to be lugged, heads lolling, up the pyramid steps; others, similary trussed, cast writhing into the fire… The watchers must have seen an unfluent movement of men, climbing or stumbling or dragged up the steps; then seized, flung back, a priest’s arm rising, falling, rising again; the flaccid bodies rolling and bouncing down the pyramid’s flanks. What they would see most clearly would be those bodies, and the blood, drenching the stone, the priests, beginning its slow tide down the stairs. A disturbing sight, for men who dreamed and women who had sung and painted their faces for the signs of warriorhood. Honours so hardly won were denied, ignored, made meaningless as men, jealous of the least indicators of rank and ordered in accordance with that rank, watched undifferentiated bipeds being done to bloody death. They watched again as each broken, emptied cadaver was taken up to be carried to the captor’s home temple for dismemberment and distribution: flesh scraped from skulls and thighbones; fragments of flesh cooked and eaten; human skins, dripping with grease and blood, stretched over living flesh; clots of blood scooped up to smear the temple walls… Neither rank nor sex nor age had relevance then. In that butchery — there was no surgical precision here — blood jetted up, heads dangled from priests’ hands, violated bodies carried away for more dismemberings and distributions… What the Mexica were shown, again and again, was a hard lesson… the human body, cherished as it might be, was no more than one stage in a vegetable cycle of transformations, and human society a human arrangement to help sustain that essential cycle… In the high space before the pyramid shrines the human and the sacred met. Human society, with its fine demarcations of rank and age and gender, that extraordinary human engine for survival, was juxtaposed with the inimical, destructive, fructifying sacred, and mankind’s heroic, desolating dependence acknowledged in the flow of human offerings. The Mexica knew they were killing their fellow men. It was that humanity which defined them as victims.
Immediately followed by the actual last line, whiplash inducing after the above:
The Mexica genius, deployed across the astonishing stretch of their ceremonial life, was to figure a human stance within the inhuman conditions of existence.
“Ideas have consequences,” indeed. This would be an utterly demented concluding sentence in any context other than one in which Clendinnen has just spent hundreds of pages waterboarding you with the Mexica worldview. Her own genius is the ability to get so deep inside of an alien psyche half a world and a half a millennium away, that she can write a sentence like that without the slightest trace of irony. And once we are within the Mexica frame of reality, the question with which I opened this review, about their meteoric rise and precipitous downfall, has a clear answer as well. What would a man think, whose great-grandfather saw the birth of their empire on a muck-covered island, whose father saw its apogee, and who himself saw its utter destruction? He would hear the mocking laughter emanating from a cloudy obsidian mirror, and he would know that we are all slaves in the hand of Tezcatlipoca.

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93d3cudGhlcHNtaXRocy5jb20vYWN0aW9uL2Rpc2FibGVfZW1haWw_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveE5EVTJNek14T1N3aWNHOXpkRjlwWkNJNk1qQTVOekkyT0RReUxDSnBZWFFpT2pFM09EZ3hPREl6TWpNc0ltVjRjQ0k2TVRneE9UY3hPRE15TXl3aWFYTnpJam9pY0hWaUxURXlOekV5TlRnaUxDSnpkV0lpT2lKa2FYTmhZbXhsWDJWdFlXbHNJbjAud2o3cENFc2M2LTJBTDhfNE1kLUl6VmNheE05Umc1ZHZmSzRZcUNxclVocyIsInAiOjIwOTcyNjg0MiwicyI6MTI3MTI1OCwiZiI6dHJ1ZSwidSI6MTQ1NjMzMTksImlhdCI6MTc4ODE4MjMyMywiZXhwIjoyMTAzNzU4MzIzLCJpc3MiOiJwdWItMCIsInN1YiI6ImxpbmstcmVkaXJlY3QifQ.X57K3gJ9xyc1ZimN0IW-yH2HMVZiZ1q--0dAwCObOaI?
