Of consequences of consequences; and second-, third-, fourth-order effects.

Dear Ishan, if you haven’t heard of the word “hysteresis”, now would be a good time. Originating from the Greek word hysteros, it describes a system that continues to react to a destabilizing (often negative) force, long after the force has ended.

As you can imagine, the destabilizing force is Covid-19, the once-in-a-hundred-years pandemic that has killed nearly 30,000 people globally. And the systems? Global and country economies. Startup ecosystems. Labour markets. Banking systems. International trade. Surveillance capitalism. Democracies.

Hysteresis is when systems refuse to return to their normal states. And though it can be observed in fields as diverse as physics, biology and engineering, the one we are concerned with is economics. 

Arguably the most cited example of hysteresis in economics https://www.economicshelp.org/blog/20144/concepts/hysteresis/https://www.economicshelp.org/blog/20144/concepts/hysteresis/ is unemployment. A severe economic shock can cause permanent, long-term damage to a country’s labour market. Because workers could stay unemployed for so long that they atrophy skills and become “structurally unemployed”. Businesses refuse to invest for growth, having lost all confidence in the future. While wages stay high, due to a shrunken workforce that throws supply and demand out of whack.

Which is why some call hysteresis “an economy’s collective memory.”  

And which is why we are introducing a new daily newsletter, “Beyond The First Order”.

Beyond just a newsletter

The most important word I used in my introduction wasn’t hysteresis. Instead, it was “systems”.

It’s a word we use frequently in our daily lives without a second thought. But as the impact of Covid-19 topples entire industries, ecosystems, economies and very soon, governments, we must learn to appreciate systems. And imbibe “systems thinking”.

The simplest definition of a system https://wtf.tw/ref/meadows.pdf is “an interconnected set of elements that is coherently organized in a way that achieves something.” That definition is from Donella H. Meadows’ book, Thinking in Systems, which is arguably the first and/or best book to introduce yourself to “Systems Thinking.”

Systems thinking is what Beyond The First Order will be about. Because it forces us to step back and view events, actions and reactions as part of larger systems. Systems that are composed of multiple elements, interconnections and functions or purposes.

Systems thinking is almost diametrically opposite to how most people, including us business journalists, analyse the world. While the word “analysis” literally means separating complex things into simpler units, systems thinking requires “synthesis”, or the ability to step back and understand how we’re all part of large complex systems, with numerous connections, interactions, feedback loops, goals and consequences.

The direct consequences of Covid-19 are its first-order effects. Beyond The First Order will look into the consequences of those consequences. And of its consequences. Of second-, third-, fourth-order effects.

Take for instance the restaurant sector. Of course it has been drastically impacted by Covid-19 and its social distancing protocols and lockdowns. But shuttered restaurants don’t just affect owners or staff, instead they also affect food delivery services who now have few places to pick up orders from. Which in turn impacts their delivery staff. And their runways. And valuations. Which in turn throws a spanner in the venture capital world’s gears.

Or wait an hour for our lead India story, by our editor Seema Singh. On the surface it will appear to talk about India’s muddled response to testing and test kit approvals. But step back and put on your systems thinking hat, and you will see compromised institutions that were meant to be independent of governments. Of poor migrant workers possibly carrying Covid-19 back to their villages and towns, away from testing reach. Of unreliable imported test kits in Spain and Turkey and in India. Of how US FDA or European CE standards are more valuable in India than local ones.

This is a new type of storytelling for us. One that we aren’t used to or trained in. But one that is required now.

We will do this via our daily newsletter, where we try to connect together stories that seem disconnected, but aren’t.

We will do this by imparting a systems thinking approach to our feature stories, as often as possible.

We will do this by training ourselves to look for solutions, patterns and resilience in story subjects. 

We will do this by reskilling our global newsroom (six countries and nine cities) to newer ways of synthesis, at times by suppressing our natural reporter’s instinct to view the world largely through our sources’ eyes.

This is new to us. We will not be great at it to begin with. But we will get better at it. Day after day, week after week. Instead of waiting for perfection, we will start “low-res”, and slowly build up to a “high-res” version over time.

I’d encourage, sorry, love for you to stick with Beyond The First Order for at least a few weeks before deciding if you want to unsubscribe. 

Rohin Dharmakumar

Co-founder and CEO

You can choose to opt-out from our emails. Click here. https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=mS92e5GJa1DSd42oz-PtJN3Qa03NKh5_HECL0PBs7qlf5n185ux-IWP4JjNN__-P_TK_fijsk2ROgHuAXPAA_OH48NXx-2jYQWUCYQZDXWmmgB7OisgxEjkQhKYH6wqwIaKIxp65-HSNwXvT6tfdW6ryrLLkhh4slENOhpqNsj-sh7tAWDzrJM3in566w5pJVXKQfFTeszZof2P-kYunRP0VoInnTphqqd0KDyFW0QebTRnWninWceL_eFQZk35YASy8Synpt_UxxX7IJ_thL21VJz2thjFISfWE1_FXxcKzncYGgKmt1UIG2A_HVC_Hz-MG1JWwre3d-jkCyT-7ivm3MmidSU53v0RuTt4eP7_IyI2Z2nwCZkHYx1MemPvAyeklf3cZQqYPkUnbwRSp3OCvniFtqfrMPr2yKSMOlfi4Pq7X1CFROHVYqsVduwvW6J-O39P3vBqGkq5tfeUr1re8ZoYbeGQPBbDjI5PbjnMfryWP4g8F5FCWX9C4HeeiUZPyBM8IFDNpyAMeXW1cfYvm-8MXQfcfr41afsMOrCc=