View this post on the web at https://whyisthisinteresting.substack.com/p/maria-shollenbarger-at-large-a-witi

Maria Shollenbarger is Travel Editor for FT’s HTSI [ https://substack.com/redirect/2e18ffe5-3a1f-48ae-843f-3ea6f5c46c05?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] and is bringing her super sharp worldview to a new Substack, At Large [ https://substack.com/redirect/03ca16f0-e7fa-4bf5-a978-95c6bb58bd9f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. Go subscribe. -CJN
How did you get your start with writing and editing?
The wonderful Pilar Guzman, currently editorial director at Oprah Daily and former EiC of Cookie, Conde Nast Traveler and MSL, who I’ve known since I was eight. I’d gotten waylaid by a few early years of working in advertising (I took an agency job out of graduate school to, you know, be employed), but had always wanted to do exactly what I do today — I think I was  young and a bit anemic of character and not really certain how to find my way out of that world and into publishing. In 2001, Pilar was the executive editor of ONE, this cool design-travel-lifestyle magazine that a bunch of people in SF had funded and launched. Despite the fact I had precisely zero bylines to my name, she offered me an assignment to do a two–page guide to Stockholm. Then she got me a job interview at Oxygen Media, the women’s converged network (web/TV/radio) that Oprah and Gerry Laybourne had launched. The digital world was quite loose and Wild West then; you could jump into the fray as a marketing/commercial person, like I did, and centrifuge around and get spat out the other side as something totally different —a writer/editor, in my case. At Oxygen I worked for Martha McCully, an OG Conde New York editor (she co-founded Allure), who started giving me more bylines even though my job was marketing manager — and who took me to Gloss.com when she left Oxygen, where she had me writing and assigning full time. In 2003 I followed her to InStyle, where I edited beauty and travel for what was, lest we forget, a print juggernaut back then with like 2m subscribers. From that point on it’s always been magazines, and from 2006, travel titles and/or HTSI, where I started as deputy editor in 2009.
Who are the travel writers people need to be reading right now?
“Travel writing”....I think writing only and always about travel, or any one thing, takes the shine off your voice. I love writing about art and philanthropy, I love doing profiles, because they disrupt the synapse paths. So any good writer writing about what it feels like to be in a strange or uncomfortable or fever-dreamy place that is not their place, is something I’m interested to read. Jo Ellison, HTSI’s editor, is great about this — she reads all pitches with a totally open mind, and likes to mix it up, and good writing is good writing, so send that finance columnist on a trip. Which we did with the FT’s Rob Armstrong (who also contributes to the style pages), to do this piece [ https://substack.com/redirect/b06d87ff-9e9a-40dc-bf6c-20ca71c2e886?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] for HTSI a few years ago.  I also sent him to Ranchlands in Colorado, about which he wrote equally gorgeously.
That said: Horatio Clare is the GOAT. Ruaridh Nicoll is very good also. Stanley Stewart has a lovely way with a sentence and brings a lot of culture to things. Damn it, they’re all men.
Travel is getting flooded with green screen personalities who love to Aman-splain while never having visited the properties they talk about. What is the role of ground truth and actually going to see things?
There is as you say a great deal of dross out there, but that’s the information age for you, I guess. What’s weird, and kind of gross to me, is the fact that some of those people have somehow become quite relevant in the travel ecosystem, with hotels that should know better kowtowing to and courting them. Quality engagement has been more important than follower numbers for almost ever at this point, so I’m a bit mystified as to why we really care about them? I shouldn’t be snobbish about anyone who’s probably out-earning me by several times my annual income, but in the context of the kind of person first and foremost who reads HTSI, and second, the kind of person I want following me here on Substack…they’re irrelevant. HTSI’s brand (and, I hope, my own reputation), is built on trust, facts, and experience. The readers, who actually spend the stonking amounts of  money on their travels (our pages tend to convert fairly dynamically), require all three. People like Emily FitzRoy and Erina Pindar are far more legitimate journalists, if you like, than a lot of so-called travel journalists who are kind of commanding the room right now, because Emily and Erina experience first-hand for a living. They discern, based on a whole lot of travelling and checking in; their job is to know it all, know it well, and then edit for you. Who cares if they’re travel agents? Follow more travel agents! (Sorry; advisors.)
How do you find ideas for what you cover in your Substack? How does it differ from your major publication writing?
My Substack is much more personal — of course, because that’s a purpose of the platform, and it’s not the purpose of my role at HTSI, though Jo is really generous and supportive about first-person writing — she encouraged me to do this piece [ https://substack.com/redirect/c6dc26f7-4080-410d-a8aa-73379208afc0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] back in 2020, which I think put me in a different category of writer in a lot of peoples’ eyes. There will be a few guides that are quite first person — with usable content, obviously, but very much my ‘life’ experience of places (Carmel; Florence; Singapore; brace yourselves for nostalgia). Interviews with people from other professional worlds, ones who travel with interesting perspectives. I might occasionally elaborate on something that’s been covered in the magazine, if there’s more to say about it that didn’t make it in for space, or timing. (I also like to link to stuff in the mag from Substack). To answer your first question second, mostly I scroll waaay back in my phone — pictures, pictures, notes, pictures, WhatsApps I received eight years ago — and remind myself of things I’ve done, seen and felt, which I want to write about now.
Who are people you read on the platform now?
WITI of course — a brilliant idea, so connecting and educating. It’s sent me down a lot of rabbit holes. It’s made me smarter, Colin! Club Yolo  always, because it’s dense with information. Yolanda and Alex have two of the highest taste bars I know, so when it’s them covering you trust the level. I read Emily Sundberg’s Feed Me  for the news of course, but also the concision, glib humour, and an excellent perspective (some of her hot takes might seem asshole-y but I feel like she’s actually in the business of calling out true asshole-dom). Nadine @ The Stanza  because it’s currently an industry must and her POV is salutary for someone like me who’s almost always writing from the front of house. I love, love Emilie Hawtin  (@clementinaworld), because you really know her through her newsletters; you can perceive the depth and sweetness and humanity she possesses, all while she’s nailing good women’s style. Gillian Longworth McGuire, who is far too unsung considering the amount of info, and caliber of it, that she has on Italy. Agnes Crawford (@understandingrome) is a friend and does these amazing deep dives on Rome; she really does have 2,300 years’ worth of stories in her brain and a lovely writing voice. (She’s also one of the two best private guides in Rome; Emily FitzRoy —IG: @bellinitravel — can hook you up). Ben Rhodes ; I can’t quite believe how much copy that guy manages to generate. His right-on-ness makes me feel better about America.
I’m still finding my way around Substack a bit, though. I want this to stay a kind of quiet happy place for me and words — the place I write and publish without thinking too hard about it.
Give us a deep cut hotel or place that you normally keep to yourself.
Honestly there’s so little I haven’t written about. One place I love  (I put it in Travelista ages ago, and tagged it in one of my posts recently) is Relais Sant’Anna [ https://substack.com/redirect/efd9d349-7c34-4cc6-bcb2-e2e8a91ac031?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], in Bibbona, near Bolgheri in Tuscany. It was closed for a while and recently re-opened.  It’s not trying to be five star or ‘anything you want, any time of day’ — Moira Rossi-Ciampolini, the owner, is not even a little bit afraid to say no. (I love and respect this, though I realise it flies in the face of most contemporary hospitality rhetoric.) She and her brother were doing the high-end agriturismo thing long before lots of others who crow louder about it. The Rossi Ciampolinis make their own everything, almost: oil, vinegar, preserves, bath products, some salumi, some cheese (the enormous chianina cows are right next door on the farm), most of the fruit and veg comes from their orchards and orto. The rooms are sweet: toile, framed botanicals, cotto floors, very tasteful and not reaching above that. The pool is pure romance,  surrounded by a lawn and rose beds and tented cabanas. The gardens are delicious, blowsy and lush right around this time of year. The breakfast, oh my lord. A huge and delicious production. This place is not glamorous or fabulous, it’s pretty.  And it’s exceptional value (sorry; did I mention my Substack is also about the places I can actually afford on my own, as a jobbing journalist?). The towns — Bolgheri, Castagneto Carducci — are great, you eat and drink (Super Tuscans!) like you’re in an epic poem. And there’s a ton of free beach a few miles away (well; the land belongs to Antinoris and Della Gherardescas etc, but the beach is open if you’re willing to park publicly and walk a half-mile or so. And it’s the anti-Capri: sand, waves, BYO everything. Often quite empty). If I were having a birthday for 40 friends I’d absolutely consider buying it out.
Best hospitality experience in recent memory? Could be plane, train, hotel or something else.
It was in Tasmania, last month, and it was really very special, and you can read about it next May 30th in HTSI.
In the meantime:  I had a bad train day the other day in Florence, massive delays (which is becoming a worryingly common experience on what’s meant to be Italy’s most punctual operation). There were no regular seats left on the FrecciaRossa I wanted to catch to Rome, which was already 110 minutes late.  I was fending off a rage meltdown, so I said fk it and bought an Executive Class ticket, which I’ve never done (business class is as high as I go). Dedicated service —one attendant for eight places — a Carlo Cracco-designed menu, free-flow everything, huge leather seats with metres between them. Like Emirates business class, minus the 19”-screen entertainment — which is fine; look out the window. It (partially) restored my faith in the Ferrovie dello Stato.
Also, The Capella Sydney [ https://substack.com/redirect/f2021a8e-79aa-4dd2-a1ec-73f9cdef3550?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. This could well be because of the confounding dearth of good hotels in a city that should be full of them, making it stand out. But I think it would hold its own lots of places; the food, the service, the rooms, the art, the ways those things are conceived to interact; the ways the hotel says Australian even though it’s a Singaporean brand. I’ve stayed three times, and it really impresses me.

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93aHlpc3RoaXNpbnRlcmVzdGluZy5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vYWN0aW9uL2Rpc2FibGVfZW1haWw_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveE5EVTJNek14T1N3aWNHOXpkRjlwWkNJNk1UazRORGc0TXpZeUxDSnBZWFFpT2pFM056a3lOek16TVRZc0ltVjRjQ0k2TVRneE1EZ3dPVE14Tml3aWFYTnpJam9pY0hWaUxUY3dNREFpTENKemRXSWlPaUprYVhOaFlteGxYMlZ0WVdsc0luMC5hMVVOWmxyZGFXY2F0ckVfbnllOXRNenVlbFExUzQ3dnRYM3NGTEN6MUJFIiwicCI6MTk4NDg4MzYyLCJzIjo3MDAwLCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzc5MjczMzE2LCJleHAiOjIwOTQ4NDkzMTYsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.NnvelRCo8oZzk88IoslHb-SlxAxpB6nOw8cIJIZIlB8?