View this post on the web at https://riverkenna.substack.com/p/patterning-consciousness-patronage

Okay I barely know where to start.
I’ve been pulling at a lot of threads, disentangling them from where they usually get knotted up, and weaving some of the disparate threads together again. Some of these threads have to do with things like
Attention as an art form [ https://substack.com/redirect/cdfc2651-1097-4dac-9ca5-7723d18e739d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Yin and Yang [ https://substack.com/redirect/6077d6a9-915b-4cb8-a038-c4beabece2e7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Embodied myth [ https://substack.com/redirect/745570c7-b42c-4ec5-8655-926d1fd9cb5c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Worship [ https://substack.com/redirect/2fadb4d0-8ed3-4e2a-bbe8-71afa8eab4b0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] as a form of absorbed attention [ https://substack.com/redirect/ff3cdc74-bca9-4485-b7c7-90dc4c7de098?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
the Humanities [ https://substack.com/redirect/60f91829-88a2-4131-8a9e-a25639d5352f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] as a way of training attention [ https://substack.com/redirect/93846b5a-97c4-4fd6-85b0-a175251df7e0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
How attention patterns your soul [ https://substack.com/redirect/9809894f-0097-41e4-8a01-b5daa2b1537c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
And some other stuff I won’t dig too deep into — but one of the more direct side trails that clarified out of all of this was the issue of patronage. I want to explain my view of what patronage is for, but first I have to give some basic rundown of the vision of arts and the humanities that I’m coming from. I’ll try to keep it brief.
The Shamanities
I don’t like that working title and I hope it doesn’t stick, but it does amuse me in a cutesy way, so here we are.
I’ve read a few defenses of the Humanities over the past few years (particularly the Humanities within institutional settings), and I gotta say, they all have the air of being unconvincing and half-hearted attempts that the authors themselves are subconsciously aware are unconvincing and half-hearted.
I just backspaced a section going over their arguments and saying why they don’t land, cuz idk, who wants to read that? I didn’t even enjoy typing it.
The core piece here is that there’s a vision of the Humanities that feels obvious to me, and it only works if the humanities are grounded in the sacred, in the metaphysical substrate of Reality and its inherent beauty, truth, and goodness.
I think I’ll be fleshing out this vision for the foreseeable future, but the broad strokes go something like:
>Giving absorbed, skillful, total attention to something affects your consciousness; it changes the patterns of your consciousness and brings them into closer alignment with the object of attention
>Jeffrey Kripal describes the Humanities as “the study of consciousness encoded in culture”; that is, the study of the ways that cosmic consciousness has been filtered through human consciousness and left its imprint on the many cultural artifacts left to us, whether literature or music or history or art or…
>It’s easy for this study to become a purely intellectual pursuit (like it mostly has in its current forms), so any intellectual study should be accompanied by deep embodied, wholehearted contemplative practice as well; only with this training is it even possible for this kind of deep absorbed attention to fruitfully re-pattern your being
>What we’ve sometimes called “the gods” or “archetypes” are, mostly, li patterns in consciousness — more precisely, they tend to be recognizable and repeating patterns in consciousness that guide human lives and cultures, lead to fruitful lives on individual and collective levels, and that express evolutionary impulses in consciousness on the individual and collective levels.
>Most of the great cultural artifacts the Humanities study are artifacts that carry these patterns, these gods, these archetypes — and by absorbing your attention in them and letting their patterns resonate through you, you contribute both to the unfolding of the being you were meant to be, and to the unfolding of the living culture you participate in. (Side note, but worth saying: a culture is, in this view, a form of intelligence that guides the life of the hyper-organism we are all cells of; so contributing to the unfolding of a living culture is contributing to the aliveness and unfolding of the vaster organism, the vaster Life we’re all part of.)
Okay, so having gone full woo, let’s just re-state the core of the Humanities a little more directly here: The Humanities (or, if I’ve wandered too far for that name to fit, we can go with the Tantric Humanities or the Shamanities for now) — whatever we call them, their purpose is not memorizing or navel-gazing about cultural artifacts like books and music and whatever else. Their purpose is to effect the transformative re-patterning of human consciousness, of human souls, to align them with their longed-for unfolding into the evolutionary impulse of Life itself.
Some of the tools that are useful for that are literature, history, music, art, history, philosophy, etc — but only when they are approached from a place of wholehearted, embodied contemplation and lived experience. Approaching them as an intellectual endeavor divorced from those other qualities is poison. And right now, the institutional Humanities are poisoned. (Honestly, the indie Humanities are poisoned too — they’re mostly a slightly loosened-up and/or sour grapes version of the institutions they take their cues from.)
Okay, hopefully that’s enough on that for the moment.
Onward to patronage.
Patronizing the Patterning of Consciousness
I mentioned the anodyne defenses of the Humanities and Arts up above, and it’s relevant again here. It affects the patronage of the arts, because a lot of people want to patronize something worthwhile, they can sense something possible and vital in the work of the arts and humanities… but they’re held back by this nagging question of whether it’s all just a vanity project, or some attempt at preserving something that’s dying, or some other lightly quixotic quest that’s more of a charity/hobbyist concern than something vital and necessary.
Which, I mean, fair. There’s definitely some value in preservation and in projects that do nothing but create a bit more beauty and interest in the world — but it’s hard to really get pumped about them.
In my view of the Cosmic Humanities, patronage isn’t focused on money, on preservation, on vanity projects — it’s a functional and necessary role in the patterning of evolutionary consciousness.
Gah, even here there’s too much to explain — we’d have to get into li patterns [ https://substack.com/redirect/3dd03b15-c029-4c94-8a35-1fe63a4c49b7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] and the gods and the ways that different people are naturally drawn [ https://substack.com/redirect/4f581efa-c244-41d0-8d12-96d04fbf2a77?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] to pattern their souls [ https://substack.com/redirect/729ecbd8-8386-4d7a-b1ff-b61e8a3a94c6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] with different gods/patterns [ https://substack.com/redirect/098f3d4d-00d2-4c90-b011-973e9d67c865?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]…
For now, I can just say this: some people are Called to pattern their souls in ways that take deep, absorbed attention to particular things — and the way the world works (or their psychology works, or this culture works, or their family history, or or or), it interferes very directly with that Calling.
Two things to note about this:
There’s such a thing as Desirable Difficulty — hardships and frictions that force us to face things that need facing, to untangle knots that need untangling, that force us to get rid of what doesn’t work and become skilled at what does. That’s not what I’m talking about here. Not all frictions and difficulties are good like this, some of them just get in the way. Those are the ones I’m talking about removing.
The kind of Calling I’m talking about is not, remember, only personal. It’s also collective. What we’re dealing with here are the desires of Consciousness itself. The evolutionary intelligence of Reality itself, guiding each person into alignment with the part of the Pattern they’re here to embody. We are all implicated in this; we are all connected in the fascia of Reality’s body; we are all threads in the single fabric of Buddha-Nature, there’s no way to tug one thread without tugging at the whole fabric — and there’s no way to untangle one thread without smoothing the entire fabric.
Given all of this, the role of patronage emerges, it seems to me, pretty naturally.
Patronage is the act or habit of removing undesirable obstacles to the patterning of consciousness, both for the good of the individual/group in question, and for the good of the entire living fabric of evolving consciousness.
This is especially necessary in cases where there are direct mismatches between the way someone is Called to pattern consciousness, and the way our culture does or doesn’t value that patterning process.
This has long been a habit with monks and other religious institutions, for example. Some monasteries sustained themselves by providing the kind of value (economic value) their societies wanted — making wine, or weaving bamboo mats to sell, or something along those lines — but in large part, those who dedicated their lives to this kind of Calling depended on others to remove their main undesirable obstacles (homelessness, lack of food, etc).
There are many cases where there is no mismatch, and where patronage isn’t much required. For example, if someone’s natural Calling is to put their attention into competitiveness, force, power, strength… our world has plenty plenty plenty of places for that impulse to go and be well taken care of. Those folks are going to be able to pattern their consciousness according to their Calling without worrying about feeding themselves or their families. Or someone whose calling is towards Love, nurturing, intimacy, care, living a life where the people around them flourish — that type of person is also not going to have much trouble finding a place in this world. —There will still be challenges, of course, life isn’t a lazy river for anyone; but their challenges will only more rarely be of the type that patronage can alleviate. (Although… subject for another time, but note to self I do want to dig into cases like this under my new definition of patronage — removing undesirable obstacles to eg- living from love; hmm.)
In other cases, there’s a mismatch, but only for a period of time. There’s a hump that needs to be gotten over, a period where a protective cocoon is needed, or a mama kangaroo’s pouch — or just a ferocious friend to guard the mouth of a cave while you convalesce. Endless are the cases where — to put it one way — an archetype can survive in the world perfectly well, but the transitional form into that archetype cannot. 
I think these factors change from culture to culture, and time period to time period — the specific qualities and cracks of different cultures have different sharp edges and abandoned places. We can only really worry about our own, for now. But one problem seems to be that our model of patronage is kind of stuck on the model left over from previous times and cultures. 
I ate lunch and lost the thread a bit, but let’s wrap up
I am, as is my habit at In•Star, rambling and uncertain where exactly I’m going with this. I took a food break and now feel like I’ve lost the threads I was toying with, they’ve just fallen apart in my hands.
Anyway, two things come up to finish with.
First, just re-stating: the Humanities, at their best, are about re-patterning human consciousness through absorbed attention — and this re-patterning is an expression of consciousness’s urge to evolve through us. —Patronage, in this framework, is the removal of undesirable difficulties that get in the way of this patterning of consciousness. 
Second, I’d love for some more refreshed and refreshing ideas of what patronage looks like. We live in a culture where the economy is our god, and the universal solvent for many many bottlenecks is money, so the tried-and-true method of giving money to those who are patterning consciousness in unique ways is just going to be a big part of the mix, no way around that.
But I want to emphasize that there are many other ways to remove such obstacles and provide space for the unfolding of evolutions in consciousness. I’ll just give a few examples, drawn from my own experience, experiences friends have told me about, and whatever else comes to mind while I type.
Hype-bending [ https://substack.com/redirect/a3f74258-bc28-4151-a8ae-ee99716dcb95?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: Even when I can’t patronize someone directly with resources, I can in many cases hype-bend for them a bit. If they write, I can share their writing in places where it might not otherwise be shared. If they make videos, I can send one or two of them to a friend I think they might resonate with. If their Calling has given them a unique skill I think would be useful elsewhere, I might be able to set them up running a workshop for my company, directing them some much-needed rent money. The only limits here are creativity.
Skill Sharing: One example I see often is contemplatives who run their own business to make ends meet and make time for their Calling — but then the day to day of running a business scatters their time and fractures the attention that is the exact thing they need to be Patterning. A somewhat common form of help I see is people offering help to these folks, help with task management, with marketing, with design work, whatever else. (Note, this is often very beneficial for the skill-patron as well — in order to do these tasks well, they have to have discussions with this person they admire about what is most important and essential in their work, which is often quite clarifying.)
Socializing: sometimes, a non-obvious bottleneck in someone’s work is that they’re too cooped up, not spending enough time with friends, or not prioritizing making friends. If you’re a gifted social hub of a person, you can literally patronize the unfolding of consciousness by connecting people and helping them get some much needed human interaction and care. The effects on softening up their awareness and making it easier to re-pattern can’t be trivialized.
Making Space: If you have a guest house or a cabin up north, and someone you admire might benefit from using it for a few weeks, to work on a project or give them a fresh space to think and feel from, or whatever else, try offering the space to them. If you know someone who’s running a residency or a fellowship or a cohort you think someone would be a good fit for, put in a good word for them, see if you can pay for part of their stay, or finagle some aid for them. If there’s any way you can invite someone who’s doing the work of their Calling into a space that would serve that Calling, put a little sweat into seeing if you can make it happen.
Uhhh, Rubies?: Who doesn’t like rubies? Give them some precious gems and gold coins, go real old school with it you Medici mfer, lean into the vibe.
Literally just reflect them to themselves: Paths and Callings like this can be challenging and more than a little crazy-making. The self-doubt can hit hard and strong, and it can simmer in the background over time. It’s a lot. And it can constrict consciousness quite a bit. And one thing that loosens it up and allows things to move again… is literally just hearing from people about what they see in you, what they see you doing. It doesn’t have to be high praise or pandering or anything like that — literally just saying “I see you out there doing xyz, and it feels like the right thing for you.” Something that simple can open up someone’s whole month, let them believe a little more in what they’re here to do. (Only partly related, but I’ve been thinking of doing a series of portraits on In•Star, brief personal essays on people I love and people I see doing what they’re here to do in the world, people who I want to share my experience of them with the world. Feels like something I want to try.)
Okay that’s all I’ve got today. The whole New Humanities, re-patterning consciousness, evolutionary intelligence thing is an ongoing concern I’ll be working to clarify, but at least I got some of the clumsier broad strokes out there today, and hopefully this vision of what patronage is and is for makes some sense in light of that. 
You’re of course welcome to do a little old school patronage [ https://substack.com/redirect/fa76e20f-3288-4762-bcf0-583e1699b0b0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], if you’re into it. If you want to mail me a little sack of rubies, dm me and I’ll get you an address. If you want more info on re-patterning consciousness to align with the evolutionary intelligence of the cosmos, just follow my twitter, I’ll be ranting about it from time to time before it inevitably crystallizes into a couple of smoother essays.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.AEM_iGNQNe6LEx_EtTQCW43ZuCXO0-Q9c82M9u23ytc?