View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/how-do-you-know-that-document-is

One of the side effects of living in the spray zone of an information firehose is that I’ve become paranoid about pretty much everything. I don’t answer calls from unknown callers. I don’t click on emails that look a little funny. I treat texts from unknown sources as if they’re the digital equivalent of sewage. I feel like I have to double-check headlines that flow past me on social media.
It’s exhausting, and it’s only going to get worse. AI models churn out endless quantities of slop — already, something like half of the newly published text [ https://substack.com/redirect/69547307-6688-4ecd-b009-1f7359c60c63?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] on the internet is not human-produced. People used to say “pics or it didn’t happen,” but now pictures and videos are no proof that something ever existed in the real world.
If we’re not there already, very soon we are going to have a very tough time understanding whether a document is what it purports to be. Did one of my students write that paper, or did Claude? Is that video authentic? Is this email from my boss real? It’s going to be incredibly difficult to tell.
Many observers say that we’re entering an “epistemic apocalypse [ https://substack.com/redirect/1b9706cd-a918-4c45-aad2-d9d4e4ac38a2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ],” but that will only happen if we fail to adapt to our information environment. Some companies are developing watermarking tools [ https://substack.com/redirect/e03902ba-4a06-4244-a39d-9ed0227ea44e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] to label AI-generated video. Others are offering ways to check for text written by chatbots, and some social networks are rolling out tools [ https://substack.com/redirect/b8f8829a-8a1c-4920-bd0e-292bf4927209?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that allow users to verify whether or not a post was typed by human hands. How effective will these methods be? It’s hard to say.
We’re not the first people in history to struggle with the question of whether a document is authentic. This is an age-old problem, made difficult in the past by a lack of literacy and barriers to travel or communication. How could you verify whether a contract was actually signed by your counterparty, or whether a letter that arrived from hundreds of miles away was what it purported to be?
People in the past invented ingenious ways to make sure they could trust the information they were reading. Some of them even worked.
Austen Henry Layard, at age 52, married his cousin’s daughter Enid, age 25, in 1869. He gave his new bride an unusual wedding present:
It was a necklace (with matching earrings) made from ancient Assyrian cylinder seals, set by a London jeweler. Most of the seals [ https://substack.com/redirect/cb6abead-63c6-45bd-a38d-adb4fa5c56be?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] in the necklace were something like 2,500 years old; one of them was 4,000 years old.
Enid’s jewelry seems to have made a splash. When the couple met Queen Victoria a few years later, the queen made a flattering remark about Lady Layard’s ancient accessories.
Henry Layard had acquired these seals during his excavations of Assyrian sites like Nimrud and Nineveh in the 1840s and 1850s. Like so many of his contemporaries in the early days of archaeology, he had blurred the line between scholarship and looting. He brought most of his finds to the British Museum, where they still reside, and, as we’ve seen, kept some of the smaller items for himself.
Millennia before Lady Layard wore these seals around her neck as decorative baubles, ancient Akkadians and Assyrians would have worn them as functional tools.
Mesopotamian seals were often carved from decorative stone, like jasper or lapis lazuli, which means that they were valuable possessions. They served as symbols of the wearer’s identity and rank and played a key role in verifying that documents were real.
Ancient Mesopotamians, who invented writing, were the first to face the problem of authenticating documents. Since they wrote on clay, they came up with an ingenious solution. What if businessmen, bureaucrats, and priests wore a little seal around their necks, carved with a distinctive pattern? Then they could simply roll out the image onto a clay tablet. Each seal was different, serving as a sort of distinctive signature.
Some seals featured religious scenes:
While others had more writing:
People used [ https://substack.com/redirect/79c7186c-d54d-4bea-9de9-c2d6c4eea8ed?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] their seals to authenticate contracts (both parties and a witness would press their seals into the tablet), letters, and deeds.
Seals for pressing clay or wax or for pressing ink onto paper appeared in many ancient and medieval societies, from ancient Egypt:
To Byzantium:
To medieval China:
To 16th-century Iran:
Wax seals might be pressed into a “tongue” hanging from a parchment document:
These technologies were absolutely crucial for social trust and economic growth. Without ways to be relatively sure that contracts and other documents were authentic, people could not have established the political, legal, and economic systems that enabled the modern world.
Pressing your personal seal into wax or clay was one way to authenticate a document, but it was probably kind of annoying to carry around a seal all the time.
In medieval Europe, some people substituted a chirograph for a seal (or used it in addition to a seal). A chirograph is a document written out multiple times on the same sheet of paper, one copy for each interested party. On the border between the different copies, the scribe would create a unique pattern. The document would then be cut. Only authentic copies of the contract would match up. This French document from 1357 is a good example:
As is this 12th-century land contract, secured with both seals and a chirograph:
By the early modern period, the emergence of the printing press meant that documents were less often handwritten, and therefore harder to differentiate. A chirograph wouldn’t work anymore. Around the same time, seals were losing trust because people had figured out how to forge them. But more and more people knew how to read and write, which meant that they could simply sign their name in a distinctive way. It was becoming more common for people to authenticate documents with their signatures. In England, signatures became standard practice in 1677 when the Statute of Frauds mandated [ https://substack.com/redirect/9f765f3a-d22c-4c59-ac57-4a6b68263642?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that certain types of contracts contain them.
As anyone who has ever contemplated forging their mother’s signature on a school permission slip understands, signatures are not impossible to forge, so some people began to develop elaborate or unusual signatures. The signature became a kind of art form, especially for prominent people. Here, for example, is German Kaiser Wilhelm II’s signature:
And here’s Queen Victoria’s:
The monarchs who made the most of their signatures were undoubtedly the Ottoman Sultans, who developed calligraphic signatures (known as tughras). These served as both functional signatures and expressions of the sultan’s sophistication. Here, for example, is the tughra of Abdulaziz, who served as sultan in the middle of the 19th century:
I spent a lot of time in elementary school developing what I thought was a cool signature, and I replicated that signature for decades on contracts, checks, credit card receipts, and the like. My kids don’t really have signatures. They get a little bit flummoxed when they’re asked to sign their names because they grew up in a post-signature world, in which paper documents were no longer commonplace and a login, a chip, or a biometric scan took the place of a mark at the bottom of a page.
I sign my name less and less these days. I authenticated the offer sheet on my current house by clicking a box on a screen, and I sign my employment contracts that way, too. Even governments [ https://substack.com/redirect/6d403722-7da4-41eb-aab8-cd5b17d3ea71?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] seem to be sealing major agreements via the equivalent of DocuSign.
There have always been ways to pass off fake documents as real. Ancient people copied each other’s seals, and modern people worked to forge signatures. But those systems worked well enough most of the time. Now, machines can forge documents much more effectively than people can, and most of our old methods of authenticating what’s real have fallen by the wayside.
If we don’t know where our documents — and therefore the information in them — came from, we’ll have a very hard time maintaining the social trust to maintain a functioning society. Can we build the digital equivalent of the cylinder seal? A lot is riding on the answer to that question.
This edition of the newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member, which gets you access to the archives and members-only posts:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.Yjk41uxVJA0kn4mY63GK2BLv12ssn5GpFdHyvuh_OvM?