View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/the-right-way-to-consume-your-stimulants

For the last entry in our series on the stimulants that made the modern world, we’re going to look at all the gear that people invested in and what that gear was meant to symbolize. 
As always, you should subscribe to make sure you see every issue of this newsletter! And if you think it’s worth a couple of bucks a month, consider becoming a paid subscriber:
I know quite a few people — graduate students and teachers, mostly — who, due to their chosen professions, cannot afford to live very lavishly. They drive old cars and buy some of their clothes at thrift shops. But a surprising number of them are coffee snobs. 
These people believe very firmly that there is a right way, a best way, to make and consume coffee. I must admit that I don’t quite get it, as a person who grew up in a household that drank Folgers by the gallon and (perhaps because of this) never developed much love for coffee myself. 
Maybe I’m missing out on the profound pleasures of coffee, but I guess my aversion to the stuff has saved me a lot of money. All of my coffee-aficionado friends have elaborate setups — expensive espresso makers, strange pots, silly-looking little cups. And, surprisingly often, they buy more equipment at what seems like significant expense, eager to try the latest coffee gear. 
In many ways, these people are following in a grand tradition of purchasing elaborate paraphernalia for their stimulants of choice. A lot of people, both today and in the past, have spent a lot of money to consume relatively simple substances (tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco) in the “best” way. As Sydney Mintz, a pioneering historian of sugar, writes [ https://substack.com/redirect/5352bef1-f9fa-4825-a821-0fdfe7716a28?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], “tobacco, sugar, and tea were the first objects within capitalism that conveyed with their use the complex idea that one could become different by consuming differently.” By purchasing the “right” gear, you could convince other people that you were the type of person you wanted to be. 
As we have seen, when they first arrived in Europe from Asia, the Middle East, and the New World, these substances were prohibitively expensive. At the beginning of the early modern period, offering a guest some tea, sugar, or coffee was a power move, a signal that you were quite rich. Even in the 1700s in colonial Pennsylvania, a pound of green tea might cost [ https://substack.com/redirect/4055b6bf-99db-4386-b39f-977ad62d4bc6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] 10% of a laborer’s annual salary.
Over time, these substances became more commonplace and were incorporated into regular people’s routines. Simply having tea, coffee, tobacco, or sugar was not a sign of wealth and privilege — but being able to store and serve it in the “right” way was. 
Here’s Joseph van Aken’s “An English Family at Tea,” painted in the 1720s:
Scholar Rodris Roth [ https://substack.com/redirect/e6c27704-d38c-45a7-a965-bfe88f0482d1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] describes the complexities of this seemingly mundane scene:
On the floor near the table is a caddy with the top open, showing one canister of a pair. The mistress of the house, seated at the tea table, is measuring out dry tea leaves from the other canister into its lid. Members of the family stand or sit about the square tea table while they observe this first step in the ceremony. A maidservant stands ready with the hot water kettle to pour the boiling water over the leaves once they are in the teapot. In the background is the tripod kettle stand with a lamp, where the kettle will be placed until needed to rinse the cups or dilute the tea. 
[Note also] the entry of a male servant who is carrying a tall silver pot, which may have contained chocolate or coffee. These two other social beverages of the 18th century were served in cups of a deep cylindrical shape, like the three seen on the end of the table. The shallow, bowl-shaped, handleless teacups and the saucers are arranged in a neat row along one side of the table. The teapot rests on a square tile-like stand or dish that protects the table from the heat. Nearby is a bowl to receive tea dregs, a pot for cream or milk, and a sugar bowl.
The teatime ritual has begun.
During this period, tea was still so expensive that it might have been stored in a lockable chest like the one below:
Or this much more elaborate Rococo version:
Inside the chest, there would be tea caddies or canisters, often elaborately decorated:
Some commemorated important events, like the crossing of the English Channel by balloon:
A prosperous household would have both green and black tea on hand:
These containers took a rather different form from the striking tea caddies that could be found in Japan — a country with an even greater devotion to tea, which I wrote about here [ https://substack.com/redirect/232f6bfc-0e46-4411-aa47-387add4d7ecd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] — at the time:
Many European manufacturers tried to emulate Asian themes on their tea sets, emphasizing the “exotic” nature of tea:
A fancy tea service would include elaborately designed silver items like this urn:
The sugar that went in the tea got similarly luxurious treatment. Even the tools you might use to pick up a sugar cube could be fancy: 
And this sugar caster — part of a very elaborate service made for the director of the Meissen Manufactory — was quite impressive:
One might have a matching set of a sugar bowl and spoons:
And some spoons were works of art in and of themselves:
Just as European tea services sometimes tried to reflect the Asian origin of the tea inside, sugar bowls often referenced the way sugar was produced, presenting sanitized references to plantation slavery. 
Chocolate and coffee seem to have had less elaborate equipment associated with them in the 1700s and the 1800s, but there was still some striking stuff, like this 18th-century chocolate muddler:
This chocolate cup and saucer:
And this vivid French coffee pot:
So far, we’ve been looking at equipment for drinking — but what about smoking? Some pipes were quite elaborate, like this remarkable German one:
But most tobacco users seem to have invested in their storage more than anything else. The tobacco boxes in some houses rivaled the tea caddies:
In some parts of Europe, especially Catholic areas, people consumed [ https://substack.com/redirect/05aac13e-48f4-4e15-980d-0552ce543df1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] tobacco as snuff, preferring that to smelling like smoke all day. While snorting tobacco is not exactly glamorous, it seemed a little classier if you kept your snuff in a fancy box. Many gentlemen would carry elaborate snuffboxes as a symbol of their sophistication and wealth. 
Because of their small size, snuffboxes became popular gifts and collectors’ items. Men would admire one another’s snuffbox collections the way that women might be encouraged to enjoy the more feminine-coded tea sets. 
All that expense and effort just to sip your morning tea or take a bit of snuff. The stimulants that made the modern world were clearly more than just useful chemicals to Europeans. They were symbols of a certain type of respectable lifestyle. The paraphernalia that went with them was a way to signal your social status. Just as people do today, the Europeans of the 18th and 19th centuries saw these substances as worthy of investment. And they definitely thought there was a “right” way to consume them.
This edition of the newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member, which gets you access to the archives and members-only posts:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.LHoQ6OUS4EMbmSuPDb4fABzdVdes8YQWUTA1vW_zhxo?