View this post on the web at https://www.forkingpaths.co/p/letters-of-last-resort

Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. This edition is free for everyone, but the next article will be for paying subscribers only, so consider upgrading to a paid subscription now so you don’t miss it. It costs just $5/month or $50/year and I rely exclusively on readers to support my writing and research.
Today, Andy Burnham, the former mayor of Manchester, becomes Britain’s 7th prime minister in the last 10 years. He’s finally achieved a lifelong ambition: reaching the pinnacle of British political power.
But for Burnham, like all modern British prime ministers, the celebration gets overshadowed by the morbid seriousness of their new responsibilities. They have to decide, on day one, whether they would launch nuclear weapons if Britain were hit with a surprise nuclear attack, wiping out the government.
And they have to do it by writing four handwritten letters to the UK’s nuclear submarine captains—the soldiers who would carry out their orders if a nuclear decapitation attack succeeded.
These handwritten orders are called The Letters of Last Resort. What will Burnham write today? And what would you write?
I: Day One
If you think you’ve ever had a truly stressful first day on the job, think again. When British prime ministers take office, they’re often euphoric. They arrive at 10 Downing Street smiling and optimistic. 
For decades, Robin Butler’s job was to wipe that smile off their face. “The prime minister would typically arrive and have to take up the job after only about two or three hours’ sleep,” Butler tells me. But once at the office, the new leader is hit with a massive pile of papers—appointments to make, official statements to sign, decisions that can’t wait. 
Among those papers, Butler would place one seemingly innocuous set of documents. Yet, it was a moral land mine, the hardest decision a human can possibly face. Butler had the unenviable task of explaining it.
His explanation would go something like this: 
The United Kingdom has four nuclear submarines, known colloquially as Trident—named after the nuclear missiles they carry on board. As you read this, one of the four submarines is patrolling the world’s oceans, a hidden behemoth with unimaginable destructive power lurking in the deep. Its onboard payload comprises 6.4 megatons of explosive power, the equivalent of around 430 Hiroshima bombs. 
If the weapons engineer pulls the trigger—a trigger that’s the modified handle of a red Colt .45 revolver—the population of entire countries can be wiped out in minutes. Once a missile is launched, there’s no recalling it.
For months, the patrolling Trident submarine doesn’t transmit or broadcast any messages. It runs silent, only dangling a long antenna behind it to receive incoming orders. Secrecy is paramount because nobody can be allowed to know the submarine’s location. 
The reason for that is simple: that submarine is Britain’s nuclear deterrent. If its location is known, a surprise attack on the submarine could knock out that deterrent in an instant, leaving the country vulnerable. As long as its location is unknown, an enemy will fear that any nuclear attack on Britain will prompt orders for a swift retaliation, a fear that’s known as mutually assured destruction. Nuke the UK, and you’ll have good reason to worry that you’ll get nuked right back.
But what would happen if a surprise nuclear attack struck London, quickly eliminating the British government in a single horrible plume of smoke and radiation? Who would give the order to retaliate? That ominous question has been answered with an ingenious—but disturbing— protocol. For several prime ministers, that protocol began with Robin Butler handing them four pieces of paper and four envelopes, one for each of the Trident nuclear submarines.
“I would then explain this ghastly moral problem,” Butler tells me as we sip tea in his Westminster flat. Butler, who is now both a knight and a lord, is tall and imposing, a holdover from his days spent playing competitive rugby in his youth. Despite being in his late eighties, he’s far more active than his snow-white hair might suggest. But when he provided the briefing about the letters, it was the new prime minister’s face that turned white.
Butler’s guidance was straightforward, even though the choice facing the incoming leader wasn’t. The leader was to handwrite instructions for what to do if Britain was attacked with a nuclear weapon and the government ceased to exist. There are no formal rules for what the prime minister must write, but four main options are suggested: retaliate, don’t retaliate, put the submarine under the control of the US Navy, or leave it up to the commander of the submarine to decide what to do.
When a prime minister leaves office, the letters are destroyed, never opened, never read. (Keir Starmer’s letters will be destroyed today.)
The rub is that the nuclear deterrent only works if Britain’s adversaries believe that the letters always contain retaliation orders. If it was known that the letters said not to retaliate, then an enemy could strike without fear of being hit by British nuclear weapons in return.
Butler would explain to the prime ministers that their beyond-the-grave orders must be written in advance, with no knowledge of who attacked Britain, or why. Retaliation could set off a chain reaction that would end life on the planet, a tit for tat with weapons powerful enough to produce nuclear winter, making humans go extinct. Without knowing the context, the prime minister must decide in advance: Should I give orders that, if followed, could eliminate our species?
Put yourself in the prime minister’s shoes. What would you do?
“It comes as a shock to the prime minister,” Butler recalls. “But it must be, above everything else, the thing that brings home to them what the weight of their responsibility is.”
Andy Burnham, in the coming hours, will receive the full weight of that burdened reality.
II: The Cost of Deterrence
Nuclear deterrence theory has evolved considerably over the years, but even in the early years of the Atomic Age, there was a clear problem. The United States had nuclear weapons, but so did the Soviet Union. And in the late 1950s, the worry was that if the Soviet Union engaged in any form of aggression—even low-level military incursions—that the United States would end up overreacting, using nuclear weapons to retaliate.
Over time, both the Soviet Union and the United States set up a doctrine that had two levels. When non-nuclear aggression took place, it would be met with conventional forces, often fighting through proxies. But if a nuclear weapon was used, the doctrine became known as mutually assured destruction (or MAD), which basically meant that if the US nuked the Soviets, or vice versa, whoever got attacked would unleash the full array of atomic bombs on the other. Doing so would mean that both countries would get destroyed, and it could quite likely mean the end of humanity too.
But there was a sort of dark, twisted genius to that strategy – it meant that using a nuclear weapon would necessarily risk the end of life on Earth, which stopped people from using them whenever there was a small political spat or even a low-level conflict. And so far, it has worked: nobody has used them since the end of World War II.
Nonetheless, the British government, like all major governments, prepared for the possibility of nuclear disaster during the Cold War. Here’s the emergency broadcast that would be played on the BBC in the event of a decapitation attack:
The hope was that MAD would ensure that such broadcasts would never be made. But the logic of mutually assured destruction would fly out the window if the Soviet Union thought that it could knock out the entire nuclear arsenal of the United States or the United Kingdom in one big surprise attack. If they believed that, then they might be tempted to roll the dice, to attack them so aggressively that they would be crippled and unable to counterattack. And that’s where we get into two key terms: first strike and second-strike capability.
First strike is straightforward: can you launch a nuclear attack? Second strike refers to the ability to withstand a nuclear attack and still retaliate.
The United States solves this problem with the nuclear triad, in which nuclear weapons can be delivered from land (ICBMs), sea (submarines), and air (bombers). 
The UK is different. It just has submarines, no land-based or air-based nuclear capabilities, so it’s essential that the location of the submarine on patrol at any given time is completely secret. If that weren’t the case, you could feasible destroy Britain’s second-strike capability by just finding and destroying the submarine on patrol.
Even if second strike capability is maintained, it doesn’t answer the question of whether the weapons should be used in retaliation. And yet, despite any misgivings, the credibility of that threat is essential. As former US Secretary of Defense William Perry told me a few years ago:
“What you have to do for deterrence to be effective is you have to have everybody in the system trained to believe that you are going to respond and that's what makes it credible. And therefore all the people who are in the system have been trained and retrained and re-retrained that they're going to respond and therefore if a nuclear attack comes on us it's almost a reflexive action for responses. It's not whether it's a good idea or whether we should do it.
The downside of that of course is if you are attacked and you want to rethink what the right response is. It's very hard to change, to do anything different from that reflexive action. Everybody's been trained and taught that retaliation was the right thing to do.”
But when I spoke to Jeff McMahan, a professor of philosophy at Oxford, he highlighted how that reflexivity can obscure what is, ultimately, a paradox in which you have to convince someone that you’re willing to make humanity extinct in order to avoid making humanity extinct:
The paradox at the heart of deterrence that is you have to get the enemy to believe that you would do what you have no reason to do at the time and that you have very strong moral reason not to do. And so political leaders who want to maintain the credibility of deterrence threats have to try to explain why it is that they would retaliate in circumstances in which retaliation would serve no purpose but would in fact kill large numbers of innocent people.
The British government weaponises that uncertainty through the four handwritten Letters of Last Resort.
III: The Letters
When I interviewed former prime minister Tony Blair, he told me that the letters underlined the responsibility of his position, but that he wasn’t devastated by the burden because he took office in the late 1990s when the threat of nuclear apocalypse seemed far more remote.
“Whereas everyone else was euphoric, I really wasn’t,” Blair says. “I was oppressed by the weight of the responsibility that was descending upon me and very conscious of it—very conscious of the fact that campaigning for office and governing in office are two very different things.”
“But to be very honest about it, I thought that the likelihood of nuclear conflagration was so remote that . . . yes, of course, I paid a lot of attention deciding how I drafted the letters,” Blair says, pausing to reflect. “But it didn’t seem to be anything other than an extraordinarily remote possibility, so I can’t say it occupied my thoughts greatly.”
The same will not be true for Burnham. One nuclear power, Russia, is in a proxy war in Ukraine, an arms length removed from fighting NATO nuclear powers. Iran is actively seeking nuclear weapons. North Korea has them. It would therefore be grossly negligent for Burnham to not take the letters seriously.
So, what actually happens if Britain is nuked and the UK government is wiped out?
First, the submarine captains have to verify that the British government is, in fact, completely destroyed. The checklist they go through to verify that is top secret, for obvious reasons, but there is a rumor that one of the checks involves determining whether the BBC is still broadcasting or not.
Second, the executive officer and the captain meet at the safe. Each of them has been given only part of the combination, so they need to be together to open it. They open the first safe, then the second, and then open the letter. If the letter says not to retaliate, they stand down. But if it tells them to launch, everything kicks into action.
The submarine rises near to the surface; the captain goes to the control room; the weapons officer goes to the missile center. And then, when the order is given, the weapons officer prepares to fire.
Once that Colt 45 trigger is pushed, the next thing you’d hear is the sound of the missile, driving up through the water, flying into the air toward its target at 18,000 miles per hour, 300 miles per minute, before raining death and destruction from above.
But all of that would begin, starting today, with a much softer sound, the sound of a newly installed prime minister being handed a pen on their first day in office and being told to handwrite four letters, in the hopes that they’ll never be read by another soul.
Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. This edition was free for everyone, but if you learned something new or value my writing, please consider upgrading to a paid subscription. It costs just $5/month or $50/year and every paid reader helps keep my writing sustainable.
If you’re further interested in this topic, I previously produced a podcast episode on the Letters of Last Resort, which you can listen to here [ https://substack.com/redirect/6a17118e-a981-4f29-9a58-6dca75f694fc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.ZvbeE7Jv4cE6TEhPozlZLxcZSrsafJNLNscZk72nxlc?