View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/in-the-company-style

Fanny Parkes was constantly collecting or looking at other people’s collections. The “exuberant [ https://substack.com/redirect/f0ed25a3-8295-4fa3-8b1c-e0b5c56f4102?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], rather plump, Englishwoman" was even married to a Collector (of Customs) for the British East India Company. In her memoir, Wanderings of a Pilgrim in Search of the Picturesque, she is always amassing items and experiences. 
Fanny was childless, restless, and wealthy. She traveled widely in India in search of adventure. Her book combines a genuine love of exploration and experience with imperialist and aristocratic entitlement. 
Fanny’s description of her 23 years in India garnered mixed reviews when published in 1850. Some reviewers appreciated her palpable curiosity and sense of adventure, while others found the whole thing unbecoming — the Calcutta Review [ https://substack.com/redirect/c1f63aef-5af9-4ebb-8d09-9865d1a0804a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], for example, said that “The flippancy and levity… with which she refers to her own faith, savour more of the cock-pit than the boudoir… in future editions… we trust to see every thing undeniably indecent or profane carefully expunged from the work.”
The book strings together Fanny’s adventures, which she narrates in an exuberant tone. Like many Victorians [ https://substack.com/redirect/4d8ad1b7-1061-4abf-88f4-3ffc8f1fd523?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], she was always collecting experiences and artifacts. This passage [ https://substack.com/redirect/848422e2-bcce-41bf-a22b-26bca1c38ac6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] is typical of the whole:
Rajpūr is situated at the foot of the Hills: I was delighted with the place; the view from the bungalow put me in mind of Switzerland. We went to Mrs. Theodore’s hotel, to see her collection of stuffed birds and beasts; a complete set costs 1600 rupees (£160). At the bottom of the valley between the Hills I heard the most delightful sound of rushing waters: taking a servant with me, I went down the steep footpath, irresistibly attracted by the sound, and found the mountain rill collected into a mill-dam, from which, rushing down, it turned several mills; and one of the streams was turned off into the valley, forming the little cascade, the sound of which had attracted me. How bright, clear, cold, and delicious was the water! Being too unwell to bear the fatigue of climbing the hill, I sent for a hill-pony, called a gūnth; he was brought down; the little fellow never had a woman on his back before, but he carried me bravely up the sheep-path, for road there was none.
A little later, she visits another bird collection:
Visited the Hospital, of which Mr. Morrow is the steward, to see his collection of birds. The specimens are very well preserved with arsenical soap, and they sell well on that account: he had two pair of the Moonāl pheasants alive, their plumage bright and beautiful. The collection was large; I selected only a few specimens, as follows:—
The Golden Eagle of the Himalaya: a bird I have often seen flying around Landowr; and a remarkably fine one. Also the Black Eagle of these mountains.
The Loonjee, or Red Pheasant, from the deep forests of the Himalaya: a bird rare and valuable; the skin on the neck is peculiar; in confinement they are timid and quiet, but the light annoys them, from being accustomed to the shade of the forests.
The Moonāl, Duffeah, or Blue Pheasant of the Himalaya… 
Flycatchers, Dhobī Birds, Magpies, and the Rana Chiriyā: the colour of the cock is a brilliant scarlet; that of the ranee, the hen-bird, is a bright yellow. They appear during the hot winds…
The birds brought from the interior by the Paharīs must have the moss taken out with which they are stuffed, and be prepared with arsenical soap; otherwise, the feathers will fall off.
But Parkes understood that the best way to share her understanding of India with other English people was through images. She commissioned all sorts of paintings, including one that caught the attention of the public. Back in England for the 1851 Great Exhibition, Fanny sponsored a painting to bring India to life for the general public. The “Grand Moving Diorama of Hindostan” allowed patrons to look at a series of giant painted scenes and imagine themselves in India:
Blackwood’s Lady’s Magazine [ https://substack.com/redirect/2c80f350-6f8b-4c3b-925f-d3ca0694589f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] found the exhibition “extraordinary:”
The painting is in the highest finish of body colour, realising the most exquisite atmospherical effects, and frequently affecting the senses by its sublime and almost incomprehensible truthfulness... The spectacle, now within reach of even the humbler classes, is, in fact, a boon to our population... through the instrumentality of one single, high-born, highly-gifted, persevering, and amiable woman, whose labours, ‘non sibi sed aliis,’ have provided one of the more purely intellectual and heart-touching gratifications ever yet offered for the enlightenment, the entertainment, and, we might add, the honour of her nation.
Just as modern travelers take countless photos in a mostly vain effort to capture the experience of encountering a new country or a fascinating landscape, Victorians like Fanny Parkes wanted to memorialize and share what they were seeing. But they couldn’t snap a quick picture of an interesting animal on a cameraphone; they had to write lengthy memoirs or commission paintings from local artists. 
Indian painters, knowing that British imperialists like Parkes presented a lucrative market for their art, catered to the employees of the East India Company. Their paintings, which combined Mughal-era artistic styles with European techniques that were more familiar to their patrons, became known as “Company Style” paintings. The artists honed their craft so that their works would be exotic enough to interest British patrons without being so exotic that they turned them off. British aristocrats collected them by the armful. 
Company Style paintings provide a unique and beautiful record of life in India during the 18th and 19th centuries — and represent the uneasy power dynamics of British occupation. 
You know, you really should subscribe to this newsletter. And if you think these extensively researched posts are worth about 75 cents a week, consider a paid subscription. 
Before the British conquered India, Mughal emperors and their peers in other Indian kingdoms had long been great patrons of art. Painters in the Mughal period especially thrived, as rulers wanted to commemorate their power. Hunting scenes were quite common. I like this one showing royal attendants clumsily sneaking around while the hunting party advances in the background:
Often, these paintings directly glorify rulers — this one by Bhavanidas captures the emperor Aurangzeb and his party preparing for a hunt in the early 1700s.
And here, a Rajput prince from western India runs down some boars in the late 18th century:
These paintings all had a few things in common: they were small — there was a long tradition of impressively precise miniatures in India — and they tended to focus on courtly scenes. 
When British people associated with the East India Company arrived and began to sponsor more art, they wanted Indian artists to retain some of their traditional techniques — this gave the paintings a touch of the exotic — but they wanted something familiar, too. The Europeans wanted watercolors, they wanted larger images, and they wanted the perspective and shading that they were used to from European art. 
One of the early sponsors of Company Style art was Mary Impey, the wife of the Chief Justice of Bengal in the late 1700s. She, like Fanny Parkes, was a collector — she established a menagerie of native animals in her compound, and commissioned artists to paint them. Her “Impey Album” of paintings became a tremendous resource for scientists in addition to being a collection of striking paintings.
One of her favorite artists was Shaykh Zain al Din, who produced wonderful images of the animals that fascinated Impey. His paintings are incredibly detailed, offset by a stark background that draws attention to the beauty of the animal. Historian William Dalrymple writes [ https://substack.com/redirect/d03e6b7e-df94-4889-a711-6ccaba0ba0f8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that “Zain ud-Din’s best works reveal a superb synthesis between a coldly scientific European natural history specimen illustration, warmed with a profoundly Indian sensibility and vital feeling for nature.” 
You can see this in his painting of an openbill stork:
Sometimes they incorporated aspects of the horticultural drawings that were so popular in Europe at the time, as in this painting of a red-whiskered bulbul and a ficus moth on a kadamba branch:
Or this starling with moths and a caterpillar on a jujube tree:
He had a way with squirrels, as you can see in this image of a Malabar squirrel:
I especially love his image of this flying squirrel hanging from a vine:
Another painter whose works found their way into the Impey Album was Bhawani Das. He created this pin-headed duck:
And my favorite Company Style painting, this beautiful fruit bat:
Das also produced a number of images for other patrons, including this cobra:
And a medicinal tubeflower, painted for a botanist named Richard Cresswell:
Because British museums and art collectors often focused more on the identity of the collectors than the Indian artists, we don’t know the identity of the artists who produced some of the more striking examples of the genre. We don’t know who painted this crow:
Or this owl, whose gaze is guaranteed to unsettle the viewer:
This beautiful pelican:
Or this colorful lotus:
Over time, Indian artists adjusted their output to please Europeans, who were displacing local Indian royal courts as the great patrons of art. Wealthy British people like Maria Nugent [ https://substack.com/redirect/ecfee89b-ce14-4bd1-8a31-8db66109fb34?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] could spend an afternoon happily perusing the art shops of cities like Patna, purchasing art made in the new Company Style. 
These paintings were a lovely artifact of an awful process — the conquest of India by a rapacious corporation. Some people view them as an example of European acquisitiveness, a watering-down of traditional Indian art forms. Others see them as a way for local artists to preserve Indian culture in the face of foreign conquest. 
But I like how the scholar Ritwij Bhowmik puts it [ https://substack.com/redirect/8ca15425-23e3-47ec-90c9-408f5e75ceff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: “the paintings are a unique blending of the two different art philosophies of the East and the West, albeit an often unintentional one, wherein their greatness lies.”
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
You can share the newsletter with others:
You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.92IgVySGiDJ8Yd5eBtC-QvsEETMrwXzG8Hl5J6aB3rg?