View this post on the web at https://thegeneralist.substack.com/p/try-our-premium-newsletter-for-just

Friends, 
We launched our premium newsletter, Generalist+, to deliver the tactics, strategies, and insights to make you a better investor and technologist. Though it’s still early days, we’re excited to say that it’s been a hit! Generalist+ membership has grown quickly and steadily, with more of you joining every day. 
While the increasing number of members tells us we’re on the right track, the feedback we’ve gotten from many of you is an even bigger proof point. Here are just a few of the comments we’ve received:
“Your Letters to a Young Investor is my go to mantra book. Thank you so much for sharing such profound and insightful content with the world.” - Samuel
"I want to become a more full stack investor - not just tactically but also from a truly fundamental level... learning ‘how to think like an investor.’ This newsletter opens the door to those insights in a very practical way." - Cole
"I'm a first time founder and I constantly find myself going back to your posts for advice from you and your guests. I'm looking forward to seeing more content like the recent one on hiring." - Abishkar
While Generalist+ is off to a great start, we’re not resting on our laurels. We want to keep pushing to make this the most valuable email you receive every week. 
To that end, we just launched two new premium series, with another in the works. That means more wisdom from legendary investors and founders arriving in members’ inboxes every week. 
I can’t wait to learn from these experts, and I don’t want anyone to miss out. So, for this weekend only, we’re bringing back early-bird pricing. That’s everything Generalist+ has to offer — past and present — for just $19/month or $200/year. The offer will expire on Monday, April 29 at midnight ET. 
The Series Lineup
As soon as you upgrade, you’ll get access to articles from our newest premium series (in addition to everything in the library). Let’s review the new options you’ll have to pick, choose, and learn from:
Letters to a Young Founder with Vinod Khosla
Vinod Khosla [ https://substack.com/redirect/51317f8f-d0dc-4b53-ae82-f7775c39e023?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] has a reputation for seeing the future. In Letters to a Young Founder, we’ll learn how he honed his craft. You can expect these conversations to be highly tactical as we discuss how Vinod launched his early entrepreneurial ventures, built high-performing teams, and continues to analyze opportunities today.
Letters to a Young Investor with Ho Nam
Ho Nam [ https://substack.com/redirect/a2f3830b-a796-4e75-886d-468b042b42c4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] is one of the most thoughtful venture capitalists in Silicon Valley, and I’m honored that he’s giving Generalist+ readers a chance to see his thinking up close. Throughout our correspondence, we’ll discuss investors who have influenced him, the modern venture landscape, and how to build an enduring firm. 
Investors Guides (Coming Soon!)
We’re building a series of guides covering venture capital fundamentals. It will cover the practical aspects of the job and ask accomplished investors to share how they source winners, support their companies, manage secondaries, and convert their first institutional LP. It’s the resource I wish I’d had when I was starting in VC. 
Why you should subscribe by Monday
Every series we launch at Generalist+, we launch with you in mind. We always aim to make you a better investor and technologist, and the new series coming to Generalist+ are full of helpful tools and wisdom.
If you subscribe to Generalist+ today, you will:
Lock in our early-bird price of $19/month or $200/year.
Gather wisdom from exceptional investors. 
Collect tactical insights from unicorn founders. 
Get access to exclusive interviews.
Unlock our subscriber-only mailbag.
You can count on those five benefits — and more in store. No matter what, we’ll always strive to be the most valuable email in your inbox. No clutter. No noise. Only value and insights. 
Again, the early-bird price ends Monday, April 29 at midnight ET. To ensure you meet the deadline, upgrade to premium today. And when you do, read an article and share your feedback. Hearing from readers like you is what helps us make Generalist+ even better. 
I hope to see you in the comments section soon!
Mario

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.YsVpZaUOwjcCU3LDgOlgFG5HkAHgoZE-_yoemuMsORo?