View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/sudan-1898

Thanks for reading! To support my work, please click the button below:
If you want to help keep this project going, you can purchase a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives and my undying gratitude.
This is a long post, so your email provider may cut it off. Make sure to click “View Entire Message” to see the whole thing.
I’ll let this guy start the story:
Yes, that’s little Winston Churchill, aged about 24. In the picture above, he’s posing in front of a painted backdrop in a Cairo photography studio. He has just begged out of his service in India to join the imperial army in Sudan because he wants to be a part of the action there. 
In his book The River War [ https://substack.com/redirect/83ff9f89-38b3-4349-bc22-0a5ec64434b1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], published a few years later, he shows that, even at a young age, he could spin a good tale:
SEPTEMBER 2, 1898
The bugles all over the camp by the river began to sound at half-past four. The cavalry trumpets and the drums and fifes of the British division joined the chorus, and everyone awoke amid a confusion of merry or defiant notes. Then it grew gradually lighter, and the cavalry mounted their horses, the infantry stood to their arms, and the gunners went to their batteries; while the sun, rising over the Nile, revealed the wide plain, the dark rocky hills, and the waiting army. It was as if all the preliminaries were settled, the ground cleared, and nothing remained but the final act and 'the rigour of the game.’
The situation was this: the British were scrambling to subjugate as much of the African continent as they could. Sudan had long been ruled by Egypt, but Egypt had come to be dominated by Britain. A man named Muhammad Ahmad — who claimed to be the Mahdi, a descendant of Muhammad who Muslims expected to return at the end of the world to dispense justice — had built a movement in the 1880s to challenge Egyptian (and British) dominance of the Sudan. Though he died in 1885, he was ably succeeded by Abdallahi ibn Muhammad, also known as “the Khalifa.” 
The Mahdi and Khalifa raised massive armies that ran several Anglo-British armies out of Sudan, making Sudan one of the few places in Africa that was able to hold out against European imperialism. 
The Sudanese people’s capable and determined efforts to keep their freedom did not, unfortunately, deter Europeans from trying to conquer them. In the late 1890s, the British decided to send a larger, better-equipped force into the Sudan to crush the Mahdist army and prevent Sudan from falling into the hands of approaching French forces. This force, under Herbert Kitchener, had Maxim guns—an early form of the machine gun—and was supported by gunboats on the Nile. 
The Maxim gun would change the nature of warfare. It was the first truly automatic machine gun, capable of firing 600 rounds per minute. In his The Modern Traveler [ https://substack.com/redirect/a8fca01d-217b-40ee-97bc-6a1b76293f52?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], published in 1898, the same year Churchill went to Sudan, Hilaire Belloc’s imperialist character William Blood, in the midst of a “mutiny,” 
Cast his lethargic eyes around,
And said beneath his breath:
“Whatever happens we have got
The Maxim Gun, and they have not.”
The final showdown between the Mahdi’s army and Kitchener’s — the battle Churchill begins to narrate above — happened at Omdurman, right across the river from Khartoum. The battlefield, captured in these photos from the 1930s, was mostly a flat expanse:
There, about 8,000 British soldiers, accompanied by 17,000 Egyptians, encountered a Mahdist force that exceeded 50,000 men. The Khalifa’s strategy was to allow the British to approach Omdurman and then overwhelm them with superior numbers. The Mahdist soldiers carried banners with religious messages on them:
The battle began early in the morning with a huge assault by the Mahdist army:
Churchill, though a British triumphalist, did not shy away from the ugly realities of the battle:
The rifles grew hot—so hot that they had to be changed for those of the reserve companies. The Maxim guns exhausted all the water in their jackets, and several had to be refreshed from the water-bottles of the Cameron Highlanders before they could go on with their deadly work. The empty cartridge-cases, tinkling to the ground, formed a small but growing heap beside each man. And all the time out on the plain on the other side bullets were shearing through flesh, smashing and splintering bone; blood spouted from terrible wounds; valiant men were struggling on through a hell of whistling metal, exploding shells, and spurting dust—suffering, despairing, dying. Such was the first phase of the battle of Omdurman.
During breaks in the fighting, Egyptian soldiers looted the bodies of their dead enemies:
The Khalifa’s troops attacked the British position again and again. Each time, their superior numbers were driven back by the pitiless fire of the Maxim guns and the gunboat artillery. 
Eventually, the British 21st Lancers, a cavalry unit, charged. Churchill seems to be trying to channel Homer’s similes [ https://substack.com/redirect/f4380113-85d4-4bab-9f3b-884b45e7abe4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] in his description of the battle:
The collision was prodigious. Nearly thirty Lancers, men and horses, and at least two hundred Arabs were overthrown. The shock was stunning to both sides, and for perhaps ten wonderful seconds no man heeded his enemy. Terrified horses wedged in the crowd, bruised and shaken men, sprawling in heaps, struggled, dazed and stupid, to their feet, panted, and looked about them. Several fallen Lancers had even time to re-mount. Meanwhile the impetus of the cavalry carried them on. As a rider tears through a bullfinch, the officers forced their way through the press; and as an iron rake might be drawn through a heap of shingle, so the regiment followed. They shattered the Dervish array, and, their pace reduced to a walk, scrambled out of the khor on the further side, leaving a score of troopers behind them, and dragging on with the charge more than a thousand Arabs. Then, and not till then, the killing began; and thereafter each man saw the world along his lance, under his guard, or through the back-sight of his pistol; and each had his own strange tale to tell.
The Lancers’ charge was not just the centerpiece of Churchill’s account, it captured the imagination of the British public. The event was depicted by a number of artists in the ensuing years as a glorious moment in imperialism. Here’s Edward Hale’s painting:
And R.C. Woodville’s:
And William Barnes Wollen’s:
The Lancers’ charge even inspired cigarette cards:
This one was part of the “Heroic Deeds [ https://substack.com/redirect/da91c132-04d7-4ace-b727-5ad243deba3f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]” series: 
Private Byrne was a big hero for the British, having singlehandedly fought off a number of enemy soldiers:
In a separate article [ https://substack.com/redirect/546d0a07-d934-4c14-9194-befe63f51627?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], Churchill acknowledged that the charge of the Lancers wasn’t actually all that militarily important, but, at the cost of the lives of a quarter of the Lancers and a great many more Sudanese soldiers, he was happy that it at least reaffirmed his sense of British racial superiority: 
We may now discern the reason why this charge - which did not greatly influence the fortunes of the battle - was of perhaps as great value to the Empire as the victory itself. [. . .] Perhaps there have been moments when we have doubted whether those qualities which enabled us to conquer are unimpaired; whether the blood of the race circulates as healthy and as free as in days gone by.
By the end of the day, the Mahdist army was broken. Young Winston ends his narrative of the battle with an arrogant colonialist flourish:
Meanwhile the great Dervish army, who had advanced at sunrise in hope and courage, fled in utter rout, pursued by the Egyptian cavalry, harried by the 21st Lancers, and leaving more than 9,000 warriors dead and even greater numbers wounded behind them.
Thus ended the battle of Omdurman—the most signal triumph ever gained by the arms of science over barbarians. Within the space of five hours the strongest and best-armed savage army yet arrayed against a modern European Power had been destroyed and dispersed, with hardly any difficulty, comparatively small risk, and insignificant loss to the victors.
By afternoon, the Anglo-Egyptian army was in possession of Omdurman and the Mahdist state was no more.
Omdurman came to mean different things to different people. For the British public it was a “sensation [ https://substack.com/redirect/6cdc8391-1efa-487d-af39-f145c079494a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ],” as newspaper readers followed along with the telegraphed reports from the front. Advertisers like Pimm’s and Pattinson’s Whisky used the battle in their advertising — Pimm’s bragged that Lord Kitchener’s army consumed their drinks at the battlefront. War correspondents entertained the British public with tales of the outnumbered army winning battle after battle while suffering very few casualties. It was one last “imperial romance.”
Not everyone was charmed by the stories coming out of Sudan. The fiercely anti-imperialist poet W.S. Blunt wrote to the Times of London, saying [ https://substack.com/redirect/0557a111-b257-4854-80e0-24358330e2cf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: 
The misgovernment of the Khalifa  has been immensely exaggerated for political purposes. . . . Knowing Nile politics intimately as I do, and bearing the past in mind, I will not hesitate longer to say that a massacre so gigantic in its proportions and so little justified by any circumstances of necessity or self defense, was never committed by a civilized European nation since modern wars began.
Historians often cite Omdurman as one of the turning points in the history of warfare. It showed that modern weaponry could overcome much larger forces and paved the way toward the horrors of twentieth-century industrialized warfare. 
As for our young narrator, Winston Churchill had complicated feelings about the battle. In some places, he depicts it jingoistically, as a great victory for civilization. In others, he seems shaken by the horrors of battle. In a later memoir, he wrote [ https://substack.com/redirect/546d0a07-d934-4c14-9194-befe63f51627?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] petulantly that modern war was no fun anymore. It "has been completely spoilt. It is all the fault of democracy and science. [. . .] From the moment democracy was admitted to, or rather forced itself upon the battlefield, War ceased to be a gentleman's game." Poor Winston. 
The British troops destroyed the Mahdi’s tomb, taking many of its decorative elements back to England with them. They dug out his long-dead body,  decapitated it, and tossed it into the Nile. Kitchener kept [ https://substack.com/redirect/c0219c4a-d96e-4c48-bec1-06bc3896d936?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] the head, intending to make a souvenir cup out of it. Queen Victoria was scandalized by the idea; Kitchener eventually had to write an apology for his behavior.
Here’s what was left of the Mahdi’s tomb in 1906:
The Mausoleum has since been rebuilt:
You have no doubt noticed that I’ve presented this entire account from the British perspective, often using the words of Winston Churchill, a famously imperialist [ https://substack.com/redirect/04853757-8cb8-429f-a7b8-632ebd417684?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] and racist [ https://substack.com/redirect/44f8bf74-251a-411d-95ca-ce8a85f33e48?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] man. 
That’s not for lack of trying to find Sudanese perspectives or artifacts, but they haven’t been preserved or studied in the same way that the British viewpoint has, at least in places I know to look (if you know of something I’ve missed, let me know in the comments). 
But I did come across some really interesting photographs of Omdurman after the war, giving a limited glimpse of life after the battle, under British rule. 
The British built a monument to the dozens of soldiers who died on their side in 1898 and erected it on the battlefield at Omdurman (it will not surprise you that the deaths of far more Sudanese soldiers were not commemorated):
A market street in Omdurman in 1936, the year the rest of the photos were taken:
And the adjacent covered market:
The main mosque of the city:
The caretaker of the Khalifa’s house, dressed in clothes typical of the Mahdists:
And my favorite photo of the bunch, just a group of kids being kids around a stranger’s camera:
None of the people in these photos had their names recorded. Even the children in this last photo are almost certainly dead now. We can guess at what they thought about the Battle of Omdurman and its aftermath, but it’s hard to know for sure. 
Events like Omdurman leave a problem for the historian: how can we interpret them fairly when the evidence we have — both visual and written — is so one-sided? 
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
Or you can share the newsletter with others:
Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.hTZEZOTVDBEKP597I6omHM1VXxAdByXbEXaXpdDp8Vc?