View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/from-walden-pond-to-the-ganges

Thanks for reading!
This post took a lot of work. If you’re enjoying it, you can subscribe to the newsletter. If you want to help keep this project going, please consider purchasing a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives, the satisfaction of supporting work they enjoy, and my undying gratitude.
To support my work, please click the button below:
Henry David Thoreau [ https://substack.com/redirect/fd65c5ec-0dcc-4bf1-9973-7b7a7af82ee3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] was enjoying the bleak, beautiful quiet of winter at Walden Pond when his solitude was broken by a crowd of workers: “In the winter of '46-7 there came a hundred men of Hyperborean extraction swoop down on to our pond one morning, with many carloads of ungainly-looking farming tools…”
These men obviously weren’t planting or reaping crops in the snow-covered ground; instead, they were harvesting the frozen surface of the pond:
To speak literally, a hundred Irishmen, with Yankee overseers, came from Cambridge every day to get out the ice. They divided it into cakes by methods too well known to require description, and these, being sledded to the shore, were rapidly hauled off on to an ice platform, and raised by grappling irons and block and tackle, worked by horses, on to a stack, as surely as so many barrels of flour, and there placed evenly side by side, and row upon row, as if they formed the solid base of an obelisk designed to pierce the clouds. They told me that in a good day they could get out a thousand tons, which was the yield of about one acre.
The scene Thoreau witnessed might have looked something like this, a photo of ice harvesting on Fuller Pond in Massachusetts later in the century:
Although Thoreau found their “methods too well known to require description,” it’s worth elaborating on this lost art for the modern reader. Workers would first have to clear the ice of snow:
Cut grooves in the ice, as on this Pennsylvania lake:
“Mark the cakes:”
Separate them:
Load the ice for transportation, as we see in the Massachusetts operation: 
And haul it away, as they did in this Canadian scene:
The last thing the shivering inhabitants of Massachusetts wanted was ice, but the stuff was in great demand in other parts of the world. Thoreau, an admirer of Indian culture, seems a little jealous of the trip this ice was about to take:
Thus it appears that the sweltering inhabitants of Charleston and New Orleans, of Madras and Bombay and Calcutta, drink at my well. In the morning I bathe my intellect in the stupendous and cosmogonal philosophy of the Bhagvat-Geeta, since whose composition years of the gods have elapsed, and in comparison with which our modern world and its literature seem puny and trivial; and I doubt if that philosophy is not to be referred to a previous state of existence, so remote is its sublimity from our conceptions. I lay down the book and go to my well for water, and lo! there I meet the servant of the Bramin, priest of Brahma and Vishnu and Indra, who still sits in his temple on the Ganges reading the Vedas, or dwells at the root of a tree with his crust and water jug. I meet his servant come to draw water for his master, and our buckets as it were grate together in the same well. The pure Walden water is mingled with the sacred water of the Ganges. With favoring winds it is wafted past the site of the fabulous islands of Atlantis and the Hesperides, makes the periplus of Hanno, and, floating by Ternate and Tidore and the mouth of the Persian Gulf, melts in the tropic gales of the Indian seas, and is landed in ports of which Alexander only heard the names.
Thoreau laid it on a little thick, but I share his wonderment at what he saw happening on the pond. The global ice trade of the nineteenth century was an improbable thing — how could chunks of frozen American lakes travel halfway around the world and keep people cool in Charleston, Calcutta, or Kingston? 
It does seem somehow wrong to my modern eye to see blocks of ice being unloaded on a Charleston pier, as in this photo from the 1930s:
It wasn’t completely unheard of, even in ancient times, for people in warm climates to have access to ice. The Roman emperor Nero used to dazzle [ https://substack.com/redirect/4ddb0257-5770-4328-b8cf-f1954a78fbf5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] his guests with granitas and other delicacies, chilled by ice that had been hauled down from the mountains and kept cold in storage facilities. But the idea of a truly global ice trade — of Massachusetts ice going all the way to India, becoming accessible to more than a tiny elite — was a product of the globalizing nineteenth century and the stubborn drive of one businessman. 
Frederic Tudor reminds me a little bit of the startup bros of the twenty-first century. When he pioneered the idea of transporting ice all over the world, he was a familiar type: a young, ambitious, stubborn guy from a wealthy background who had skipped college at Harvard to jump into the business world and make money. 
After a few years of mercantile schemes involving trade with Caribbean islands, Frederic and his brother William were hanging out at a picnic back home in Massachusetts, drinking beverages chilled with ice from the family ice house. William said it was sad that people in the Caribbean would never be able to enjoy a cool, refreshing drink. 
Frederic immediately realized a business opportunity. Ice was cheap to acquire (you just had to pay laborers to extract and ship it), and many boats arrived in Boston full of raw materials from the Caribbean but returned relatively empty. The Tudors could harvest ice, pack it in the ships with sawdust insulation (a cheap waste product from Massachusetts sawmills), and make a fortune!
The only problem was that everyone thought Frederic’s idea was stupid. Boston newspapers made fun [ https://substack.com/redirect/eec43c87-d7a5-4c34-a115-a819ad1b84ac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] of the Tudor brothers’ first shipment in 1805 (“We hope this will not prove to be a slippery speculation”) and nobody in their first destination, Martinique, wanted the ice — never having had a cold drink, they didn’t see why anybody would want one. Tudor wrote [ https://substack.com/redirect/80402902-4cbe-49a7-b2a8-73583ad51bc3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] in his diary that
It is difficult to conceive how determined to believe most of the people here are that ice will melt in spite of all precautions; and their methods of keeping it are laughable, to be sure. One carries it through the street to his house in the sun noonday, puts it in a plate before his door, and then complains that 'il fond'. Another puts it in a tub of water, a third by way of climax puts his in salt! And all this notwithstanding they were directed in the handbill what to do.
The venture was a disaster. The ice melted, the brothers lost $4500, and William quit. 
But Frederic was not the sort who gave up easily. He believed [ https://substack.com/redirect/80402902-4cbe-49a7-b2a8-73583ad51bc3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that
He who gives back at the first repulse and without striking the second blow, despairs of success has never been, is not, and never will be a hero in war, love or business.
After the disaster of his first voyage in 1805, Tudor doubled down. Like a nineteenth-century Steve Jobs [ https://substack.com/redirect/3ab76a30-8fc8-4c4f-9189-bfcb0e897284?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] (“People don't know what they want until you show it to them”), he set out to teach the people of the tropics that they needed ice. He went deep into debt to hand out free samples of his product. He spent time in debtor’s prison and was once "pursued [ https://substack.com/redirect/8e6fbc90-a320-4a26-b597-257bd173ec03?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] by the Sheriffs to the very wharf" before jumping on a boat to Cuba. There he used his last funds to build a durable ice house and finally turned a profit. 
This illustration from the 1830s shows the arrival of an ice shipment in Cuba; the cargo is unloaded by enslaved people:
Tudor was relentless in scaling up his business. He used the profits from Cuba to build ice houses in other warm places in the Western Hemisphere. Then, as Thoreau marveled, he gambled that well-packed ice would survive the almost 8,000-mile journey to India. 
Here’s a shipment being unloaded in Bombay in the 1880s:
It was then stored in ice houses like this one in Calcutta:
Some people in warm climates were enthusiastic about the arrival of ice. One British colonialist wrote [ https://substack.com/redirect/ec49076f-f859-43d0-8e02-70c688367219?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] an ode to Frederic Tudor’s ice:
Now kus kus tatties fail to cool
And punkah breeze defying
The mercury marks 95
And we are almost frying.
Still, some relief we may enjoy,
For with our 'dall' and rice, Sir,
Liquids become a luxury
From Yankee Tudor's Ice, Sir.
This blessing answers very well,
For sundry other uses
One, as a friend to you I'll tell,
To Comfort it reduces.
Send for a spon (choose a light brown)
At Bathgate's you can get it,
Make a large wig to fit your crown
And with Ice water wet it.
While others were distrustful of cold drinks, preferring hot beverages because they were less likely to bear disease or shock the system. One song went:
Full many a man both young and old  
Is brought to his sarcophagus 
By pouring water icy cold 
Adown his warm aesophagus
Despite the skepticism, Tudor’s shipments were a hit. The ice business became big business, and Tudor earned the nickname “Ice King” as he ruthlessly undercut potential competitors. Ice not only chilled the drinks of aristocrats, but it also enabled the shipment of perishable food all over the world. Railroad cars full of meat could now cross the country, making the stockyards of places like Chicago and Cincinnati possible.
Frozen lakes all over the north were sliced up to serve humanity’s growing demand for ice.
Some ice-harvesting operations seem to have been relatively idyllic, like this one in Massachusetts in the 1930s: 
But other operations, like this one at Rockland Lake, New York, were fairly industrial:
This scene, from Wolf Lake in Indiana in 1889, is even more frenetic:
On the other end of the trade was a network of ice houses, like this one in London:
And ice-sellers, like these girls doing what would normally have been considered a man’s job during World War I:
Tudor died a very rich man in 1864, and his industry continued to prosper for a few decades afterward. But inventors eventually devised machines that could make ice from water:
At first, these machines made relatively dirty and expensive ice. But as these techniques became more efficient, they became cheaper. By the 1920s, “plant ice” was supplanting “natural ice.” Over time, the ice trade dwindled. It was no longer good business to ship ice from Boston to Calcutta when people in Calcutta could make their own. 
The crews stopped carving up the frozen ponds of the North so that people in the South could enjoy a cold drink or a fresh steak. Walden Pond became quiet in the winters once more, and its waters no longer mingled with the sacred waters of the Ganges. 
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
You can share the newsletter with others:
You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93b3JsZGhpc3Rvcnkuc3Vic3RhY2suY29tL2FjdGlvbi9kaXNhYmxlX2VtYWlsP3Rva2VuPWV5SjFjMlZ5WDJsa0lqb3hORFUyTXpNeE9Td2ljRzl6ZEY5cFpDSTZNVFUzTVRNMk56STNMQ0pwWVhRaU9qRTNORFUzTlRreE5URXNJbVY0Y0NJNk1UYzNOekk1TlRFMU1Td2lhWE56SWpvaWNIVmlMVEk1TlRjeU5TSXNJbk4xWWlJNkltUnBjMkZpYkdWZlpXMWhhV3dpZlEuT1dXVXUwUnBKQWs4N3hqYkJSN2NaUk1YaEJyUDdTYjNVV21RdC1ZZFJVayIsInAiOjE1NzEzNjcyNywicyI6Mjk1NzI1LCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzQ1NzU5MTUxLCJleHAiOjE3NDgzNTExNTEsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.HJ11RNjYMLw-x6P_7nWx0sOO5AzX5jFJYYkAMefTpzk?