View this post on the web at https://whyisthisinteresting.substack.com/p/the-monday-media-diet-with-alexis

Alexis Page is a longtime friend. Shew’s writing the excellent Substack, Self Involved. [ https://substack.com/redirect/ebd13c0f-2744-4435-8654-2883a509d0a4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] -CJN
Tell us about yourself.
I’m a cosmetic product developer and beauty brand strategist. I interned at MAC during college and then stayed for a decade, heading up their designer collaborations and seasonal color collections. I was first hire at Glossier and did all the original product development and branding, including the pink bubble pouch. Went on the road with Pat McGrath for a while, made some clinical skincare brands, little of this little of that. I’ve always been really obsessed with product and color and texture and believe that everyone makes daily choices relating to and informed by the beauty industry, whether they know it or not. Three months ago, I started a beauty and wellness Substack called Self Involved [ https://substack.com/redirect/ebd13c0f-2744-4435-8654-2883a509d0a4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], which focuses on just that. It serves as a place to stick all my product recs and opinions, as well as the broader esoteric health topics I’m interested in that don’t correlate directly to my on-paper career.
Describe your media diet.
Frankly, my diet is heavily informed by my two main group chats. I’m old fashioned and will do the usual players on my own in the morning - the Times, NYMag, Page Six. But then the day evolves into a fullscale media exchange between me and “Gifted and Talented” (covering media, fashion, art, NYC related gossip) and “The Clubhouse” (covering celebrity and culture). What I learn as a result of these chats sending links and then the real-time sharing of our opinions cannot be overstated. We cover the big articles that everyone’s talking about and the random minutiae that makes life worth living. We’re all extremely online and these chats function as a finely tuned filtering system.
My favorite Substack is Health Gossip. I also love Gift Guide, Selling Out, Feed Me, Paraphernalia and Fast & Loose. I use Substack in a much different way than other forms of media. I keep a super tight edit and let things find me naturally. I don’t immediately subscribe to things, I don’t like to be inundated.
I read Lauren Sherman’s Line Sheet as soon as it hits the inbox.
Podcasts I listen to regularly are Huberman, How Long Gone, SUP and Dial #DAN.
I have a beautiful Instagram algorithm that only shows me ballet, Japanese stretching, Bravo clips and yogurt recipes, which is how I like it. My policy here is similar to Substack. I don’t follow beauty brands or look at much beauty content. I like discovering my own things and consider myself to live outside of the beauty industry. It’s how I develop my own ideas and see beauty through a larger cultural lens, rather than being bombarded with brand launches and product tutorials.
What’s the last great book you read?
On Grief by Jennifer Senior. A friend gave this to me recently and it’s an essay on one family’s loss, how they remember it twenty years later, and the specific phenomena that happen over time when multiple people are in multiple types of pain. I avoided it at first and then read it in an hour with pleasure.
What are you reading now?
Lives of Saints by Nancy Lemann. The recent reissue and Times profile of Nancy reminded me to read this, after meaning to for years.
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication?
I open to whatever is on the last page and assess. Then I skim through front to back, looking at ads and for any article that immediately stands out. I read in order of interest, I skip anything I don’t care about. Everything about me has been informed by the magazines I read growing up, but as an adult I hate having too much stuff around so I don’t buy them or subscribe like I used to. There is still no better feeling than sitting around on a Sunday morning and catching up on a stack of magazines though.
Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
Sami Reiss’ Snake Super Health newsletter. He’s a weird genius with a wild writing style and if you’re a serious health person (or want to be a serious health person) you will lock in immediately. If you take selfies in Alo, you may think it’s a foreign language. A lot of times when people ask me a health question that’s above my pay grade, I refer them there.
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
Transit. I live above a bus stop and it shows you the real time bus location so I just wait until it’s a few blocks away and then head downstairs.
Plane or train?
Plane. I can’t believe how many people on here say train. I don’t want anything to do with Penn Station or Amtrak unless it’s, for some reason, an emergency or my last resort. I’m a Delta psycho with an extremely dialed in travel system and am happiest when in the sky. Flying can be easy if you know how to do it.
What is one place everyone should visit?
Buffalo. Biased because I’m from there but Buffalo has the sickest architecture and is an absolutely perfect place in the summer. The vibe reminds me very much of Portland, but without the money. It has a lot of hyper-local, old school businesses and is also worth visiting for the AKG Art Museum (formerly Albright-Knox), Frank Lloyd Wright’s Darwin Martin House, I suppose Niagara Falls, and 911 Tavern for wings. Stay at The Richardson Hotel, built in 1880 as the State Asylum for the Insane.
Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into.
Trying to make sense of the Lisa Taddeo Instagram chaos. I loved Three Women and am fascinated by the amount of people breaking from reality lately. What does it all mean?

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93aHlpc3RoaXNpbnRlcmVzdGluZy5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vYWN0aW9uL2Rpc2FibGVfZW1haWw_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveE5EVTJNek14T1N3aWNHOXpkRjlwWkNJNk1qQXlPVGt6TmpreExDSnBZWFFpT2pFM09ETXpNelEyTURFc0ltVjRjQ0k2TVRneE5EZzNNRFl3TVN3aWFYTnpJam9pY0hWaUxUY3dNREFpTENKemRXSWlPaUprYVhOaFlteGxYMlZ0WVdsc0luMC5ZbTJMbnVJQ1V6QXFZZDBOYkJoYWxQZ3NRejBFLV9WdE9Ta3hYczNNYkdvIiwicCI6MjAyOTkzNjkxLCJzIjo3MDAwLCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzgzMzM0NjAxLCJleHAiOjIwOTg5MTA2MDEsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.r8_RMqfFCnzuO3dJezDSHC568VYq5vpMsT1yaBGZns8?