The panel of judges included leaders such as Naveen Tewari, Ruchi Kalra, Prof. Rishikesha Krishnan, Deepak Shenoy and Aditya Suresh

Good morning Ishan,

“You are a quick-commerce company. You have a billion dollars. How will you win?”

Team Metamorphosis from IIM Ahmedabad has been named the winner of The Ken’s Case Competition 2024. This was the contest’s inaugural edition, launched in partnership with Zerodha. Sai Charan Munagala, Gaurav Solra, and Paidi Krishna Pradeep—team members with diverse specialisations in product, operations, and finance—created a “big bold playbook” for Bigbasket to edge out nine other top teams in a tightly fought grand finale on 18th January, 2025. 

As the winning team, Metamorphosis was awarded a cash prize of Rs. 10 lakh.

Four other teams were runner-ups in their respective categories for each quick-commerce company—Swiggy Instamart, Zepto, Blinkit, Flipkart Minutes. Each team won a cash prize of Rs. 2.5 lakh.

As we wrote earlier, one of the reasons we did this was because we wanted to reinvent the way case competitions are run. To do this, we designed a case that placed the real world front and centre to all participants. They needed to select an existing quick-commerce company and understand where it finds itself today. Then, they needed to figure out what these companies want to do, why, and their competitors’ next moves. Finally, they had to figure out a way to win using US$1 billion in capital. 

Oh, and they had to decide, describe, and defend what “winning” meant to them.

Since we wanted this case competition to reflect actual on-the-ground conditions—with all of its choices, complexities, and challenges—it was critical for us to have a jury of five judges who represent and embody the real world. 

Thus, we (and the participants!) were thrilled when an exciting, accomplished, and enthusiastic set of judges agreed to come onboard for the grand finale. These are all individuals who grapple with the real world every day in their own domains, and have a deep understanding of how strategies work in practice. They all brought in their own perspectives. 

Meet the judges for The Ken’s Case Competition 2024.

Naveen Tewari is the CEO and co-founder of Inmobi and Glance, two of India’s most innovative unicorns.

Ruchi Kalra is the CEO and co-founder of Oxyzo and co-founder of Ofbusiness, both of which are unicorn companies.

There are only two leaders in India who’ve each founded two unicorns, and we were exhilarated to have both of them as panelists for the grand finale. Naveen and Ruchi are leaders who have a track record of creating influential companies in areas where few believed were possible. Among founders in India, they truly understand the transformative ability of US$1 billion, and what it takes to build organisations and companies that sustainably create value over a long period of time. 

Aditya Suresh, head of India equity research at Macquarie. His team has authored some of the best reports on quick-commerce in India. In fact, the original case itself had multiple references to reports authored by Aditya and his team.

Prof. Rishikesha Krishnan is the director of IIM Bangalore. He’s also one of India’s leading academics on corporate strategy and innovation, and has more than 200 publications spanning outlets that include refereed journals, the popular press, case studies, book chapters, and books.

Deepak Shenoy is CEO and co-founder of Capitalmind, India’s premier wealth management firm that provides investment portfolios built on rigorous analysis and expertise. Two of three quick-commerce companies in our case are public (with more on the way), so we were excited to have Deepak bring in his perspective as an investor and his expertise on the market side.

At the start of the grand finale, just minutes before the final presentations were about to begin, we invited the five judges to share what they were expecting from the finalists. 

Each judge offered their own version of what winning looks like for them. 

Ruchi emphasised the need for capital to create “sustainable outcomes” because “a billion dollars is a lot of money”. She added, “as much as we are judges, I’m really looking forward to learning from this competition”. 

Naveen echoed the idea of learning from what the top participants had created, but also put the capital in perspective. “How you spend a billion dollars is not written in books… only a dozen people in India’s history have spent that kind of money, so it’s practically uncharted territory.”

Some of the other judges were even more stark in their assessment. “When I heard about quick-commerce, I always wondered how it would ever make money, and I still have that concern…” said Prof. Rishikesha Krishnan. “So I’d love to see how you make quick-commerce profitable and stand on its own feet.”

Deepak agreed. As a public-market investor, he said, “I’ll ask about where’s the money. I’ll care about profits, and will we get that without using the words ‘adjusted’ and ‘ebitda’.”

Aditya took a broader view beyond the numbers. In his words, “there is hypergrowth but there’s also hypercompetition. I’m interested in knowing how participants handled aspects like inflation, rent, delivery riders, and things like that.”

Over the following three hours, 10 teams formed by students from institutes like the IIMs, FMS, XLRI, and the Mesa School of Business each made a 10-minute online presentation to this panel on how to win as a 10-minute delivery company. 

Team Metamorphosis emerged as the winner. They crafted a compelling strategy that positioned Bigbasket as a company that was best placed to offer a bouquet of products including Mealkits, quick commerce, and health services. The team offered a compelling vision, backed by solid financials and a clear path to profitability. 

This grand finale was the culmination of a long, gruelling contest. In all, 450 teams from 32 colleges registered for the case competition. Nearly 100 teams submitted detailed solutions in the first round. Eventually, 46 teams were longlisted and sent in even more detailed answers to follow-up questions. The solutions were innovative and detailed; some were even outlandish. Ten teams made it to the final round to go head-to-head with each other.

The runner-up teams were as follows:

Swiggy Instamart 

ROI Rangers, XLRI Jamshedpur: Deepak Singh Gahlot, Aishwarya Ubhrani, Satish Chandra Karavadi

Zepto 

KenVision, IIM Bangalore: Nikita Shanbag, Shantanu Rajgire, Prafull Patil

Blinkit

Outliers, IIM Ahmedabad: Evin P Denny, Aslam Ahammed SR, SB Ankith Suman

Flipkart Minutes

Illuminaire, IIM Lucknow: Manasi Parakh, Mehar Sindhu, Ramesh Shenoy

You can read a summary of the solutions offered by the top ten teams here https://the-ken.com/competition/blog/meet-the-ten-teams-shortlisted-for-the-final-round-of-the-kens-case-competition-2024/.

Two months ago, I wrote that we created this product because we asked ourselves one question: what would a reimagined, real-world case competition look like?

If we had to start from scratch, unburdened, how would we go about it?

This is our first step in that direction. Over the last couple of months, we published some of the best and most innovative solutions and feedback we received, which you can find on the case competition’s dedicated website https://the-ken.com/case-competition/.

Next year, we’ll be back. Hopefully, with sharper answers. There will be a new problem statement. A bigger event. More prizes. Wider participation. And of course, another case with a question that’s rooted in the real world. It will be an event that celebrates the best and brightest strategies from India’s smartest business students. 

This is very exciting. I can’t wait to see how it will unfold.

Here’s to reinvention.

Regards,

Praveen Gopal Krishnan

COO, The Ken

This email was sent to ishan.mail@gmail.com 

Something wrong? Tell us at support@the-ken.com mailto:support@the-ken.com

Want to unsubscribe from our weekly newsletter, The Nutgraf? Click here https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=MQkeio7W6mU7ROyI96IbsDmTAw-bcFF5oFUh3u4B6UNoMDAwdTAwMPrRhRMgljFRD9C5A4gOQZSeEOkvMKddtn0pTAE-ZZSQckKaFvRh54Ia8e-zu_BqkwxvjrxGFEbF5pQVavq6w2us1ml8r5JQOm8ojUfY5o5N_S-mDYDgyF-i-2ZxXFA9PnRtess1t6KM38kjxx3Y3chJmK0FudORKFOQKB6A9Tce8ksioGat9o4P5t6-MRKydWyKinOTg_-l4dAbpOiVb313uOFdFHCNLJDzRvAzfSjfA3he9sRkIS81Y8Pd6sfNsKqfrziuSiPWAIy_7Gg0aWW-Cg-KIlJElSDZukavNOH9g6HkYrvs_LKurx8hDBERvgl9lkJqpEUmzyp0p7crA_MJaO3vKHPqLRBizpJ14rrhg2bF7uUZUt-QB7WBvu41H3TWfXYnNOauSD31Zqy6_1Nj3zY782fOekHmUHvET379qU6E8UGqefUEpQVO8B8aPS79O_JvLTWd8I1ugm-nQan1zY8KufccilCGWkmrAqXfmp_pBSHKWY5KMhWsxBX1J_mgWhmst0IY2WbompZaTPc=Don't want to hear from us again? Unsubscribe from our emails https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=1CRrW9DTMM0bDTYVYuLGum_qnIu5VCGZLo59cSfjaihoMDAwdTAwMBcTLljGdw7wbPbyehTCq0juN8-cAzCje_71-m-lntmbivM5EqgO1f0OjbJPMCMh_pAXX-qJi0rDwa1X9xX-G1cPFRIxyqOVcQtPL2shTFpdJnSprAFU12z5zVqUDLCUjdOnU8SxCsrJYIbgF5pErcZk4F2AQcsrgYMFIXBUd71uoKeUEZjTxzS8q85yCNY6CMuET1nyv0vWmIpBvzcq0YcmrX3sBr_AWKhFIzPLUVwZcfUB-4UTBPZwK5_B3L6NDGk7Ciq8nZzsKUbcuB0ErnfE8DE_1rjmIgFlfCIDTpuP5KwSiSIDNaTkZ56cpI-f-0ibLIZ-m9N_hNzFSxpuX_tIr7Fu1O18cK5ua4zfD_jXso6zQOj801xU3YWcqXt9EA9MM7Fh6QXHLd9bbnWQs1HvS8qIbAnb6qCR9WBxv9Np8lbuuVQoUPybAYruGJQRIGpxOJzR2EBjvbK0F1B1qKDCfSC47SxF4YeTGBuwSi_Lr0ScxMw6EV0yDdZkJ8PBng==

© 2025  The Ken

https://sg-mktg.com/MTczNzQzNTUyMXxxNEMtbUlNa3dsd0lmS3BEYWVET2p2MzJkQlloTHBwOTB0Z0tleG05eW5UVEdlVzE1MWptTUtWb3p1RlZsTmVveUJmZUE4RzNmZ3BjZWN4NzZtVl9ibndMeDA5aXlMZFR2NEhrR3FRTFlVR1E0bkxmZVBRTXhxYzZZWG5KZDFxRVYyYWd6SHNBNkVxeERaNXdXTWszMlBuODdyWXZXZExnUTRRdkc1aHhzRlpna3VVY00wSi1QX2c3LWJxejBseVo3WXVvdVJWTnREbF9TMTBSb3lrbWpPMUFfSV9UWE1fRzJiaFdjMEt3ZEkzSUEtTUk2ZndqRlFLaVJrV0ZwRzNyTEE9PXyqbR52YLJ3st9VhB6adDU-2AGOCwKZm5xuqI9FTtVgXA==