Once we know and accept what we’re bad (or average) at, it liberates us from the need to spend too much time and attention on them.

Sunday, 24 September 2023

Good morning, Ishan. It’s Sunday once again, and I’m back with what will hopefully be another contemplative edition of the First Principles newsletter—edition #14.

Let’s start with a question: what are you bad at? 

It’s a question that at once seems trivial and trite. Of course, there could be so many things we’re bad at. Even more that we’re average at.

But when we’re asked to list them out, what comes out on the top of our list? What are the top three? Would our colleagues agree with them? Would our partners? Our close friends?

It’s not that easy. Certainly nowhere near as easy as answering “what are you good at?”

Some of us will come up with answers after thinking on the spot. Those are what I call the “shallow” or “unconscious” bads. We don’t have much conviction in them. They’re the kind of superficial answers most of us have come up with sometime in our careers when someone asks us, “what are your weaknesses?” 

But there are some of us who have spent time contemplating what they’re bad at, and more importantly, what they’re okay being bad at. These are the conscious bads.

And counterintuitively, knowing what you’re truly bad at is a liberating experience. And it makes it easier for you to become better at the things you’re good at. 

I’ll take you back to a conversation I had in February with Srikanth Iyer, the incredibly candid and contrarian co-founder and CEO of Home Lane, an online interior-design platform. 

Srikanth sort of stumbled into the interior-decoration space after exiting his earlier startup, Edurite, an edtech. Like many founders, he ran into a problem and decided to solve it with a startup. :-)

“One was about two years before I started Home Lane. I had gotten one or two homes done. Had a terrible experience then. I never in my wildest dreams thought that I would go and try and solve this problem. But I just filed it away saying, I’m spending Rs 10-15 lakh here, but still not getting any predictable output. Why is this so bad?

Why can’t there be a brand I can just blindly go sign up for and they do everything?”

And like many founders, having started a business to solve a problem, he soon understood why the problem wasn’t so easy to solve. :-)

In a few years, he came to know that net promoter scores (NPS) could be negative too!

“So first of all, I was not making money. Second of all, I had a severely unhappy customer. By the way, I’ve always taken NPS from our customers. From day one. Because I said if I’m going to change the game, I have to measure if I’m changing the game or not. So I used to take NPS.

Our NPS was -27 and that’s the first time I knew that NPS could be negative. I thought zero was the worst that you could go to. So I was flummoxed, basically. And then I chanced upon this book called Uncommon Service. It’s a HBS-authored book by this lady professor called Francis Frei. She’s right now on the global board of WeWork. But she used to teach at Harvard then, and she’s written this book along with one more person and the book is very clear.

It says if you are in the service delivery business, you cannot be great at everything that you do. Meaning you can’t give the best price and the best service and the best quality and the best timing. And if you try to do everything the best, at best you will be mediocre at everything. That’s the premise. 

So it says pick a couple of things that are very important to your customer and also pick a couple of things where you necessarily will be bad at. Because unless you are bad at two things, you will never be great at a couple of things, which really matter to your customer.

So if you think that you can be average at this, very good at something, and fantastic at something else. It won’t happen. So the theory is you necessarily need to be bad at something in your business to be great.”

We’re all bad at many things. It takes no extra effort from us. Some of us might actually be good at it. ;-)

But it’s the conscious knowledge and acceptance that sets us free. Even better, it’s when we choose to be bad at something that the game really changes.

In the case of Srikanth and Home Lane, here’s what that meant. 

“What did I start the business for? I wanted to offer predictability. Predictable quality, budget, and most importantly, timeline. So I had, in fact, come up with this thing, saying that in 45 days, I will give your home back to you. Otherwise, I’ll pay you rent for every day of delay. That was my promise to the customer.

So, I said, if I have to be great at predictability, I need to pick what I want to be bad at. And what I needed to be bad at, to be predictable, was variety. Because variety was the enemy of predictability in my business. Or rather, variety was the enemy of scale, also. When I’m saying enemy, I’m being a bit harsh, but you know what I’m getting.

So I started pruning down the services that we were offering: Flooring, no. Civil, no. We still don’t do these. Eight years later. We still don’t. Civil and flooring and plumbing. We don’t do. Because it’s a very different skill. I said I can take the order, I will get the order also, but I’ll never be able to execute it. And that’s not scalable and I didn’t want to do something in Jayanagar, Bangalore. I want to do something across the country. If I can’t do it, I don’t want to do it at all.

So, be clear of what you don’t want to do.”

Srikanth Iyer of Home Lane on embracing what you’re bad at in order to do better at what you’re good at, and being a wartime general | Episode 14, First Principles, 16 February, 2023 https://the-ken.com/podcasts/first-principles/srikanth-iyer-homelane/

https://the-ken.com/podcasts/first-principles/srikanth-iyer-homelane/

Listen on:

Spotify
 https://open.spotify.com/episode/63PIYgn9lHFL0bXOHdDMoF?si=78d3ffb0383a4d44

Apple Podcasts
 https://podcasts.apple.com/in/podcast/first-principles/id1639125773?i=1000599843984

Other Platforms
 https://the-ken.com/podcasts/first-principles/srikanth-iyer-homelane/

Once we know and accept what we’re bad (or average) at, it liberates us from the need to spend too much time and attention on them. But that can only happen if, like Srikanth and Home Lane, we’re deliberate about them.

This is different from merely focusing on your strengths. Instead, this is about choosing to be bad in certain situations so that we can be good elsewhere. The trade-off is important.

I’m not much of a sports watcher, but I came to know from a book I’m currently reading https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/148665055-anatomy-of-a-breakthrough on how the world’s greatest football player chooses to be bad in the first few minutes of a game, so that he can be great subsequently.

“But Messi is famous for not playing the game during its opening minutes. This is his evolutionary tweak, which developed as he played the game at progressively higher levels. For the opening minutes, Messi ambles back and forth near the middle of the field and almost never engages with his teammates. Whereas other players run and sometimes sprint, Messi spends much of his time walking, rarely breaking into more than a slow jog.

Messi does two things during these first few minutes. First, he calms himself. Easing into the game is Messi’s way of ensuring he’s fully engaged for the remainder of the game. His on-field vomiting has resolved itself, in part perhaps because he’s found a more effective way to calm his nerves. Second, he spends this time scoping out the opposition. His legs move slowly, but his eyes dart from player to player, assessing his opponents’ strengths, weaknesses, and tactics, and monitoring his own team’s movement with and around the ball.

Messi is less valuable to his team early in the game, but this tactical pause elevates his value for the remaining 95 percent of the game.”

A smart way to handle anxiety — courtesy of soccer great Lionel Messi https://ideas.ted.com/how-to-handle-anxiety-lionel-messi/

So, till next Sunday, what do you choose to be bad at? :-)

Before I leave, here’s an experimental addition to the newsletter. Since we end up discussing books so often in the context of First Principles, let’s try and be more conscious and deliberate about it? 

Book recommendations from the First Principles community

1. Uncommon Service: How to Win by Putting Customers at the Core of Your Business https://www.goodreads.com/es/book/show/11805131 – by Frances Frei, Anne Morriss 

Recommended by Srikanth Iyer, co-founder and CEO of Home Lane:

“This was a transformational book for me”

2. The Three Box Solution https://www.goodreads.com/ar/book/show/27038048 – by Vijay Govindrarajan

Recommended by Prof. Radha Iyer: 

“Similar principles (to ‘subtraction’, the theme of edition 12) are discussed.”

3. ShuHaRi: The Japanese Way to Improve Excellence https://www.makigami.info/continuous-improvement-tools/shuhari-japanese-learning-system/

[Image courtesy: Héctor García]

Recommended by Varun Vohra:

“Martial arts has a very old Japanese statement Su-ha-ri which is very similar (to ‘don’t fill categories’, the theme of edition 13)”

If you have book recommendations, please email them to fp@the-ken.com mailto:fp@the-ken.com with a few lines that explain why others might find value in them in the context of First Principles thinking? 

See you next weekend!

Regards, 

Rohin Dharmakumar

First Principles is published by The Ken—a digital, subscription-driven publication focussing on technology, business, science, and healthcare.

This newsletter was sent to ishan.mail@gmail.com. Something wrong? Tell us at support@the-ken.com mailto:support@the-ken.com

Want to unsubscribe from First Principles? Set your email preferences here https://link.the-ken.com/asm/?user_id=2349339&data=eIjw1Weksg-5-hmgCp9AR_yFC0BXavD9Fj4pp9grreVoMDAwdTAwML10nqRLJG17P3tcREsM3mPCGriFVSE89tyZ7oaU-YJHOg6Sh9M0L8oA3YlAZwPAKvZakFge-lOq18CbbDmnDc_3k8H9Wg3xBBmt_u7SACtx4-EJocjkeS5C0-Ec2G46q1MKG6uUHs-DBz24sLIgNj5mteVy4wPv6wmxQE0hf1HNf2GmTjcmJLbByGdk1CT57emvADxu9YRYc7CK-jQ-6wvrG_kdDtRnQxBGbQ53x2qw7dEiuYzJHntYfMhwQbYDLIdhkvT705_zsKoS2BiGN76XaIwYvlSKlhAeKd9arSc38ThVNNSLVVoHDzLHx5zyWwIHcK_m6Ylpl04n3FtEv8J8spOr1AfIHIRyuRRnqhUrTHiCkouUlT__8Fj96hSRkDlE_BzWa_NWBxf2P1DkdbT-57N0tc7XCmvb6H8bhsY9ZoHfgAYrzZHS9MgDciQDNI9WByRq-MvJjBwHuKs9wV5vsS_oX7DmMiC34Kdjxmz-

© 2023 The Ken

https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=U_HSfWSUu0tiSjIrZtxn-O1YovOhPUmj6blN7hnRJ8toMDAwdTAwMN4kS8V22gkbsyZiB8lUrccCkbM0bwoWjL4twdTUhGOOPcpJfxvXT5UGxmud8QbTrd206SPq3pStPSOv8PQDXwqmRY1f48NH8RBaUDr7qQIS1FP2e7PWx20vLbPbO4o0tVMU2VnvE41dVkSAqjf3ntmDHa6xoxL51jSsuogCs3q8JOCQx2O71n9TVDz1cZBU8NSOhBUsxBQDmAvJZabpc6VxvfiPT7FIXMfn2u5j7yNGlGJm2uULrdpfw8yeWy_WPSVXVfZbm7B_x7u9b_6jgAusOUa8f_0-smoOePauIXU8Z0MQN9I3dhKzwX2wMfGT41gEPvh8AZPSLIDIwXiBMUmtB6tUDMdvicVNHWVOdD_5QC_r7GN15sMw8Nj0GSti3uc8iD66N0MI0VTHHJGY6OzNRPnUDbIIKRGKWBf7_K51GCP_dL3iO9xvYctc2qlkzEVUKDJn16s3fQl-RFrxQ-wj2SNKOxZg3iVfZEexIc5Lu5_AFKZAQ9s_1LVUNPQbtg==

https://sg-mktg.com/MTY5NTUzMzY5OHxjeVlRNEtIbXJ1LWdDbGNvNjR3dHdHRGluMVpEbG9kTzZsX0ZoaFZJdlFMNFJrTGN4R3ZNdVBLQzZiM0ROOXJ1alU2ZGo4YlZCYU0yWmlXS2xJcTJ6c1ZERHVkUVMweW5RX0tNUXloWmNkNXBUVGdfTVp2Vm1pTGQwT3JfYXowd1NFZGhPb2VtYXFOLUU0UHlmN1pJNmxqdV9jX1pUa2RPd2ljVkMwcEl6SzA0TG1reExqQ215cEVtTXBzNnBSNXVWdTdaOS1ubHEzdHhEVUVCeThGME11QVNzWDlnSHg2M1JMZlJWVmpGZEFRcHlocmFyazNlNV9GaXVfUTdfelZhcmc9PXzRC-3dz6zq_oH2AMBGc4B3_od1AxEO3VageIYXY3KR9Q==