View this post on the web at https://riverkenna.substack.com/p/following-invitations

A few times in my life, I’ve dropped everything, left home, crammed everything I own into a backpack, and gone a-wandering.
It always sounds so romantic and adventurous at first — just me and the open road, not knowing what country I’ll be in week to week, not knowing who I’ll meet, where I’ll fall in love, when I’ll see a vista that sticks with me the rest of my life. 
Pretty much every time, 3 months is the limit. After about 3 months of having no stable place or people, no home to return to, no stability of any sort — I start to look for the off-ramp.
This seems about normal, for what it’s worth. I’ve had a lot of friends who cram their lives into a backpack  and hit the open road and are excited to spend the next 6 months, 10 months, 2 years out in the wild open world… and when their first flight leaves, I start an internal countdown clock for 3 months. 3 months until I get the call “Idk man, it’s been fun but I think I need to figure out where I’m settling down now, this is getting exhausting.”
This time, I’ve been wandering since last July. I have firm plans that continue through mid-April, and softer plans that stretch into autumn.
And the thing is, about 8 months into this round, I’m doing fine. I’ve lived in 15 rooms in 6 countries since last summer, and that sense of tiredness hasn’t found me yet. Granted, there’s also not much of a sense of romantic adventure. It mostly just feels very casually matter-of-fact. This is where I am. This is what I’m doing. 
Which feels like the main difference between now and the times I’ve done this before: after my 20s, I made a promise to myself that I was done traveling for the sake of traveling. If I go anywhere from now on, I told myself, it will be because I have a reason to be there. 
That rule of thumb has worked great, and has especially served me well this year. I went to Portugal because there was a month-long community event I wanted to be part of. I went to France because my friends and I were hosting a soul-making retreat. I went to India because there was a specific doctor there I wanted to work with. Everywhere I’ve gone, I had a reason to be there. And for the next couple months, I’m going places where I have a reason to be there. 
I think that’s why it feels so different this time around. I’m still hopping country to country, room to room. I still don’t have any idea where this ends or where I settle down when it’s over. I’m on an open-ended pilgrimage, altering my course to wherever I’m invited. I’m on a bit of an odyssey, except that I don’t actually have an endpoint I’m aiming for. I’m just out here wandering. But even though where I’m going is a mystery, the steps along the way keep becoming clear. I get invited to my next step, over and over again.
My job, for now, is to follow the invitations. To notice where the universe (or my friends) are inviting me, and to give a yes or a no based on my gut sense of how it feels. 
And for whatever reason, this feels like a much better and more sustainable way to be out wandering than the loosey-goosey go wherever and hope something happens type of wanders I’ve done before.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.dCzW7L7HvoT2OLcsZfQ1ZsFXc0pKJalbZ8faz_HD4Vs?