View this post on the web at https://riverkenna.substack.com/p/i-started-this-one-with-a-i-can-just

My Lil Odyssey
The way my life has been working, the universe tends to do my scheduling for me.
I got sick, went to the emergency room, got diagnosed with a chronic illness — the next few months were all about recovering and getting back on my feet. In that time, I got invited to a series of events around Europe, and suddenly my schedule was set for the next few months. 
By the time I was wrapping up those events, I’d been invited to stay with a friend in Vienna, and told I needed to spend a couple months in India for ayurvedic treatment, so there was the next couple months scheduled.
After India, they told me I needed to go somewhere warm and familiar to recover — Chiang Mai was the obvious choice, so there’s the next month or two, for a nice recovery period. 
While in Chiang Mai, I was recommended a stay at a traditional Tantra ashram back in India, and when I looked into it, it ticked exactly all the boxes I’d been looking for all year.
Then it turned out a twitter mutual was finishing retreat at the same time as me in India, so we decided to meet up. There was my next month or so.
When I finished in India, a friend invited me to Singapore for an impromptu writing retreat. And then I went off to Thailand to do an impromptu relational retreat with the same friend from India.
She left a few days ago, and now I’ve got a bit under two months to myself before I start off on the next bout of invitations in July, going from Scandinavia to the Balkans to France to (most likely) Spain… and after that the trail is unclear again, but. I mean, yeah.
Just between what’s already happened (starting at the end of December 2023) and what’s already scheduled (ending mid-October ‘25, with softer plans spanning into January ‘26), that’s already like, almost 2 years where all I’ve had to do is sit back and wait for the next round of invitations to reach me. 
All I have to do is follow the trail, be present at each step of the way, and the next step lays itself out right in front of me.
Honestly, this is kinda how my life goes in general
The past couple years has seen a higher intensity of things finding me, but honestly I’ve always had a fair bit of this. When I go out looking for things and trying to make them happen, results are mixed. When I open myself up to things and wait for the space to be filled, weird-good stuff tends to fill the space.
One of the best jobs I ever had, an old boss just reached out to me, asked if I wanted the job, and told me to come in in a couple weeks to start. That was it, I didn’t apply or interview or even know that there was such a weirdly perfect job for me available in the area. I just quit my old job and bummed around for a bit, and suddenly my old boss called.
Most of the more important romantic relationships in my life, I didn’t go out and find them — they just came to me. (And the relationships where I have put myself out there, approached women, done the usual dating thing… those have tended to go various flavors of Not Great.) I wish I could tell you a couple of the truly ridiculous stories here of women just falling out of the sky and into my life, but we have limited space and a couple of them aren’t just my stories to tell publicly, alas.
Even money, I haven’t tended to have the usual relationship with. I’ve never had much of it, but it’s always shown up when I need it. While trying to pay off my student loans in my 20s, I was working in Vietnam, doing these terrible 13-hour days in Hanoi schools and Hanoi traffic, pretty much burning myself out until I collapsed and quit. After a few days of lying quietly on the floor of my apartment, I realized that I hadn’t actually checked my bank balance in months, I had no idea how much money I had. So I went to the bank, checked my balance. I had exactly enough money to finish paying my student loans and then pay another 2 months of rent. So I paid the loans, gave myself two months to recover, and then found another job.
A couple years ago, I was working on my Somatic Resonance [ https://substack.com/redirect/ec664d14-5fd4-4c7d-806e-9a73eeb6bf26?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] course, struggling to pay rent and unable to dedicate real time or effort to this side vocation. Then out of nowhere, a stranger (now my buddy Brent) got in touch and offered to pull together a grant for me, to give me a bit of runway on doing this work without distractions. He pulled it off, and I’ve been doing this work ever since.
A few months later, someone got in touch to say they were going to do a 2-month creative co-working incubator, and would I like to come and have my rent paid while I stayed there? And of course I went and got to finish up the Somatic Resonance course and meet some cool friends and run a cool day retreat and bum around Berlin for a couple months. 
Again, I didn’t apply for or ask for any of this, it kinda just showed up to fill a vacuum in my life, a space I’d been wanting filled for awhile.
More stuff like this has been a pattern in my life, but we can stop the examples there. Over and over again, things just kind of come to me, show up when I need them — and this kind of thing accelerates when I stay On The Path of what I’m meant to be doing. When I allow life force to move me.
Something wants to change lately, and when I started this article I had an idea of what I was gonna say about it but now I’m less sure.
When I started writing 20 minutes or so ago, this was my basic attitude:
I’ve been in a wait-and-receive posture ever since my diagnosis, and it keeps working out, but hey, I have things I want to do! I don’t need to just sit and wait for the universe to tell me when to do them, I can put them into the schedule myself! I want to write a book! I can just schedule that in after October, that I’m going to dedicate the next year of my life to writing a book and running a couple more mystery school pop-ups and that’s what I’m doing with that year of my life, hell yeah!
Now, I uh.
I don’t knooooowwww maaaaaaannnn that doesn’t seem to be how my life force works. Whenever I impose myself on the life force, impose my plans and structures and ego desires on the way my life force wants to organize itself… all the energy just dries up.
You know what it is, I’m a natural Radagast. I love this article, “The Sarumans and the Radagasts, [ https://substack.com/redirect/af4026b9-acc9-487f-a26a-de67d843c4b4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]” about two different styles of working with power.
Basically, Sarumans are the type of people society wants to mold us all into, it’s the Correct Way To Be. They’re very organized, structured, focused, left-hemisphered; they’re direct and decisive. If a Saruman wants to do something, they tell their life force to get in line and do the thing through sheer force of willpower.
Radagasts, on the other hand, are spontaneous, open, right-hemisphered; they’re non-linear and intuitive. If a Radagast wants to do something… well, realistically he wants to do 12 different things, and he just does all of them in strange and non-linear ways that don’t make sense to Saruman onlookers… but somehow they seem to work out? And sometimes those dozen different projects all kind of seem to… merge? and synergize? and how the hell could they have known and planned in advance that these disparate things would actually work? How could they have known all the ways that good luck would come in and save their asses just when things were about to go wrong?
They couldn’t. They didn’t. But the secret of being a Radagast is to follow the eros and radically trust that it’s going somewhere. Even when there are months and years where it seems like the eros isn’t adding up to anything that will pay the rent or transform the zeitgeist, you keep trusting that it’s all doing what it needs to do, that it will all pay off in some strange flourish of fate.
And weirdly, it just keeps doing so. Not out of any linear, structured determination — but by an endless series of nudges in the right direction, a persistent devotion to the things that want to come through you and into the world. And a faith that if you keep bringing them into the world, they’ll take care of you.
Okay, but I’m frustrated
So I’m a Radagast, yes, and it tends to work out well for me, yes.
Yes, my schedule keeps filling up with the exact opportunities I’d want, often opportunities that I wouldn’t believe even existed until they’re presented to me. And yes, I have a community of beloved friends who care about me and are aligned with my mission in the world. And yes, I have the freedom to bounce around from country to country following these friends and opportunities and whatever feels alive in the moment. And yes, I’ve arranged my life such that if a Tuesday afternoon is particularly beautiful, I can just decide to do no work and instead go sit under a tree and watch squirrels play. 
Okay, my life is pretty great. But there are frustrations.
The more I type, the pettier they feel.
You know what, I’m feeling through the frustrations with a bit more distance right now. And they are real, for sure. And some of them are legitimate worries and such. But they basically all come down to resources. 
To be perfectly frank, I’m sick of scrambling for money. I love my work, I love what I do, I love the retreats and events and fellowships I get invited to… but I’d really like to be able to say yes to a $1500 month-long invitation without having to pull up all the accounts and see how I can make it work. 
My ideal relationship to money isn’t really to have a lot of it — it’s just to never have to think about it. My ideal magic power would be a pocket or a credit card that just always has the amount of money I need waiting for me. I need a $600 plane ticket? Cool, there’s 600 bucks in my pocket. I want to buy a snack on the plane? Nice, there’s 5 bucks in my pocket. I need 2 months deposit and 2 months advance to rent this apartment? Alright, luckily my pocket is stuffed with 8 grand today, nice. …Okay the card is probably more practical.
The fantasy I mentioned above, of taking a year off to write a book and run mystery schools — I’m pretty much certain that I could pull that off if it’s what my life force actually wanted from me. And honestly, I would not be surprised at all if that’s what actually happens. My life seems to be tending in that direction anyways.
But as for the fantasy of it? I think part of what I’m fantasizing about is having the resources to take a year, not only to work on a task that doesn’t pay, but to do events that I would have to pay up front for space and supplies and so on. Part of the fantasy is being able to trust that I can do that reliably, rather than having to scramble and stress and pull resources out of the air to make it happen. 
I think I’m also a little frustrated with my life-force, he’s being rude at the moment
The frustrating bit the past few days was that I was trying to come up with some workshops or offerings I can run to make some money. I need to fund these upcoming trips, and also my truly horrifying tax bill (the US does not like the self-employed, let me tell you that). The frustrating bit is that I’ve got a lot of Big Juicy Stuff coming through right now, but none of it is in shape to be shared yet — sharing it or shaping it into something to be shared runs the risk of deforming it before it’s ready.
And at the same time, when I try to pull up older workshops that people found helpful that I might re-run, my life-force mostly just huffs at me and goes “don’t distract yourself, stay on task.” 
The “task” in this case mostly being to read widely and look for missing pieces, while also practicing and meditating for much of the day, and while also taking care of my physical body (autoimmune conditions are rough, I am not a fan) — and when I try to explain that we do in fact need to find ways to fund all this food and rent and so on, my life-force kind of just gets exasperated, says “it’ll probably be fine, don’t distract yourself with it.”
…If I’m being perfectly honest, even me writing this article is kind of a passive aggressive act of rebellion at this point. I feel life-force standing behind me, tapping his foot and looking pointedly at his watch. This is the vibe of my experience, the past few paragraphs. 
I uh, I find this a little delicious. I’m behaving very badly. lol. lmao. Take that, Me.
Okay, I think I’ve talked myself through something here… where’s that leave me?
So main points so far,
My life seems to work by staying on the path and allowing incredible opportunities to drop in my lap
When I try to force opportunities or chase opportunities that are simply what I think are feasible and desirable… the opportunities are more lackluster and my pursuit of them tends to end poorly, even when I do succeed
I strongly desire more reliable and robust resourcing
…sooooo maybe I just stay on the path, do my best work, and trust that it will find me when the time is right? Just listen to life-force and stop getting distracted about it?
That feels in keeping with how my life seems to function. It also still leaves me feeling a little tense about the coming months, but I’m used to being a little uneasy when I’m between clarities. 
Yeah, this feels cleaner than anything else I can think of. I’ll probably still be a little fidgety about it, but I can keep returning to Trust. I can do that.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.VJwb4J82K7YffOyOSfI6dJRxaQbzVill4CDUZSNU-PM?