View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/tea-a-stimulant-that-made-the-modern

In the early modern period, the twin forces of global trade and colonialism introduced people around the world to foods, medicines, and diseases that had previously been confined to a certain region. One category of items seems to have been especially important: stimulants. 
What fueled the feverish intellectual and commercial activity of the age? Certainly, the new availability of substances that provide an energy boost — from sugar to cocaine — played a role. For the next few weeks, we’re going to be looking at the stimulants that made the modern world. First up — tea! 
This post was first published in 2024, but I’ll be back with new entries in the series next Sunday. Subscribe so you don’t miss it! And if you want access to the archives, members-only posts, and the warm feeling of supporting something you enjoy, sign up as a paid member:
In the 1600s, an exciting new drug crossed the oceans in trade ships. It was exotic and rare, which only increased its allure. While under the influence, some people found that their minds raced, but others felt that it helped them to concentrate. It gave people unnatural amounts of energy and stamina. It did have side effects, though — some people got jittery, others felt their hearts race, and some couldn’t sleep. Many people got hooked and felt like they couldn’t function without the stuff.
The London Gazette announced [ https://substack.com/redirect/e3ee2390-ce56-402c-8b41-025e22d7fc03?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] its arrival in 1658:
That Excellent, and by all Physitians approved, China Drink, called by Chineans, Tcha, by other Nations Tay, alias Tee, is sold at the Sultaness-head, a Cophee-house, in Sweeting’s Rents by the Royal Exchange, London.
As you can see from the advertisement above, tea was not the first caffeine-delivery system to hit Europe in the early modern period. Coffee had shown up about a century before and provided a bigger hit of caffeine. But tea was something different, a beverage with subtler charms, a stimulant that somehow lent itself to soothing rituals. And no place was more charmed by tea than Britain.
Tea entered British culture when King Charles II got hooked on it in the middle of the 1600s. Up until then, tea had been quite rare and was seen as something medicinal; you were supposed to drink it to help the spleen.
Charles’ wife, Catherine of Braganza, had arrived from Portugal with exotic fashions and habits that fancy British ladies wanted to emulate. She brought with her, probably as part of her dowry, a chest of tea. Portuguese expeditions to South and East Asia had been bringing back tea leaves for a while, and tea drinking had become fairly common among the Portuguese. Charles tried the stuff and liked it. The British East India Company, looking to curry favor with the king, brought [ https://substack.com/redirect/41166608-006a-4e92-9e79-770f7ef7a1c8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] him two pounds of tea in 1660, then 23 pounds in 1666. Soon, the Company was doing a brisk business not only with the king but with fancy British people who wanted to copy the royal couple.
A court poet, Edmund Waller, wrote [ https://substack.com/redirect/419342cb-1e50-46c9-ab66-6dfe016fbd03?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] a little rhyme that linked the queen and her signature beverage:
The best of Queens, and best of herbs, we owe
To that bold nation, which the way did show
To the fair region where the sun doth rise,
Whose rich productions we so justly prize.
Coffee was cheap and workmanlike. It had a powerful flavor and provided a stiff jolt. But tea was different. Its taste was more muted, its preparation more finicky. It was foreign, exotic, and expensive, and it was about to become a key part of British culture.
But before we look at the European history of tea, we should go back to its source. The “best of herbs” has a long and complicated history, starting with ancient Chinese emperors and culminating in modern big business and imperialism. So put the kettle on — let’s explore the history of tea.
Though tea was a relatively recent arrival in Britain, it has been consumed for more than four millennia in East Asia. Tea was important enough in Chinese culture that its discovery was attributed to a mythical semi-divine emperor, Shennong, who is also said to have invented farming and medicine. The legends tell us that he ate dozens of herbs to test their effects on his body; many of the things he ingested were harmful. He countered the effects of the poisonous plants by drinking tea, which he discovered when tea leaves blew into his cup of just-boiled water.
This 17th-century Japanese painting of Shennong shows him nibbling on some tea leaves (I’m sure you are wondering: what’s up with his head? Shennong was usually described as “ox-headed,” which apparently looked like this):
Though Shennong was mythical, we have physical evidence of tea and its culture going back at least as far as the Han Dynasty, where tea has been found in emperors’ tombs. It was prized for its taste and its mental effects — one author from the 200s BCE claimed [ https://substack.com/redirect/aef14132-9d3b-47fa-831a-b6c859cf0341?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that tea “makes one think better.”
But tea was never just a utilitarian drink; Chinese people established strict standards and complex rituals around it. During the medieval Tang Dynasty, a scholar named Lu Yu compiled his knowledge of tea and tea culture into The Classic of Tea. The book consists of ten chapters outlining the myths around tea, methods of preparation, and the 28 pieces of equipment one needs to properly make a cup of tea.
Lu Yu described [ https://substack.com/redirect/1f637903-2adf-4d0e-9e28-5d0add426c91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] the perfect type of tea:
The best quality tea must have
The creases like the leather boots of Tartar horsemen,
Curl like the dewlap of a mighty bullock,
Unfold like a mist rising out of a ravine,
Gleam like a lake touched by a zephyr,
And be wet and soft like
Earth newly swept by rain.
Lu Yu was so devoted to tea that his friend Huangfu Zeng wrote this poem [ https://substack.com/redirect/69576cbf-1634-458d-a9f6-e5d6b27df7ee?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] about him, which captures how tea had become associated with refinement and contemplation:
A thousand mountains will greet my departing friend,
When the spring teas blossom again.
With such breadth and wisdom,
Serenely picking tea—
Through morning mists
Or crimson evening clouds—
His solitary journey is my envy.
We rendezvous at a remote mountain temple,
Where we enjoy tea by a clear pebble fountain.
In that silent night,
Lit only by candlelight,
I struck a marble bell—
Its chime carrying me
A hidden man
Deep into thoughts of ages past.
In Japan, these values would take their highest form in the art of the formal tea ceremony. The ceremony — in which matcha (powdered green tea) is prepared and consumed in an austere, ritualized fashion — reflects the values of Japan and especially Zen Buddhism in the 1600s. Sen no Rikyu, tea master for several rulers of Japan, became the figure most associated with the tea ceremony,.He developed it to reflect values of hospitality, harmony, and quietude.
The ceremony became highly prescribed: the design of the room and the attendees’ seating and movement must follow a formula. Even the conversation is somewhat scripted (there are moments when guests are expected to comment on certain aspects of the ceremony or the tea itself). But it is also meant to be a celebration of wabi, the Japanese idea that beauty can be found in imperfection. This means that many of the vessels associated with the tea ceremony are deliberately imperfect. Some of the most prized tea bowls looked quite humble, as in this 17th-century example:
Or this one:
Here we can see four women participating in a tea ceremony around 1875:
This nineteenth-century still life of the objects associated with a tea ceremony gives a sense of the tranquility and intentionality associated with the rites:
On the other side of the world, Britain was in the process of wholeheartedly embracing tea. This 1758 Richard Houston print shows a well-off British woman enjoying her morning tea:
But tea wasn’t just a morning wake-up. Afternoon tea became a beloved ritual, especially for women, who used tea as a reason to gather in a private space and visit with one another in relative informality. Mary Cassatt repeatedly painted women at tea; it was a moment where she could capture her trademark moments of social intimacy:
By the 1700s, Europeans had developed fancy vessels for storing and serving tea just as people in Japan had, though they didn’t go for wabi-style imperfection. The tea caddies are especially interesting. Here’s one from the late 18th century:
And another from around the same time, this one decorated with Asian-themed images:
You’ll notice that both of these have keyholes — the tea inside was so valuable that you’d want to lock it up.
Other tea caddies (this one is from the Victorian era) more directly copied Asian vessels:
Tea was quite expensive for a while. It was very heavily taxed by the British government until 1783 (you may remember some unpleasantness about the price of tea in Boston in 1773). After that, it remained a staple of upper-class life, but became a workingman’s drink, too. Tea shipped from China, combined with sugar from the Americas, energized Britain’s aristocratic ladies and industrial workers. Tea became a big business.
Chinese tea plantations grew into huge operations; many artists tried to capture the bustling work involved in cultivating, picking, drying, and packing the tea.
This illustration shows the tea plant (Camellia sinensis) surrounded by the life cycle of the tea, from cultivation to enjoyment:
And here we see workers in the warehouses performing quality control:
The problem was that the Europeans who were ravenous for tea had nothing particularly valuable to offer China in return. For a while, British merchants traded silver for tea, but this led to an imbalance as China stockpiled the world’s silver; Chinese merchants weren’t interested in buying much that the Europeans had to sell. So, in the early 19th century, the British tried two tactics.
First, they engaged in horticultural espionage. The British East India Company sent an agent named Robert Fortune into China to smuggle tea plants out of the country. There, he found out [ https://substack.com/redirect/1f637903-2adf-4d0e-9e28-5d0add426c91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] things that the Chinese had understood for many centuries: how to pick the leaves, how to cook and roll them, and that green and black tea were actually from the same plant. He even realized that Chinese merchants were dying the leaves green with poisonous chemicals because British consumers thought that greener leaves were better. Fortune’s investigations helped the British to establish tea plantations in India.
But, far more consequentially, the British happened upon a trade good that they could trade for Chinese tea: opium. British merchants smuggled so much opium into the country that it created a public health crisis in China. After they ignored Chinese officials’ pleas to stop dealing drugs, the British engaged in two Opium Wars against China. Chinese losses in these wars began a Chinese “century of humiliation” in which the British and other colonial powers dominated much of China.
Opium gets all the attention when people talk about this conflict, but the British demand for tea, their drug of choice, was what drove what William Gladstone called [ https://substack.com/redirect/dd8de266-17c0-4dab-a01c-a7460a766532?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] the “infamous traffic” and eventually led to war.
By the nineteenth century, tea was big business. We can see what an event the 1897 opening of the English and Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Societies London Tea Warehouse was:
The tea that arrived in this warehouse was the result of incredibly hard work, from picking the tea (these workers are in India):
To transportation — these Chinese workers carried more than 200 pounds each!
Tea is, in the end, just some leaves in hot water. But it has taken on cultural and historical significance far beyond its humble nature. It’s been the height of elegance, a cause of war, and the centerpiece of a globalized industry. So next time you settle down for a quiet cup of tea, you might reflect on the millennia of history that brought you this “best of herbs.”
This edition of the newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member, which gets you access to the archives and members-only posts:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.UOxhw-xH7CqvG6RE7X3tm4OtYmCzuYKLlOLPjYJRUEM?