View this post on the web at https://whyisthisinteresting.substack.com/p/the-monday-media-diet-with-steve

Steve Calder [ https://substack.com/redirect/5d079f61-d5a5-4454-afe3-79712b880fcd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] (SC) is a friend of WITI. He runs one of my favorite menswear stores in Melbourne, Informale. [ https://substack.com/redirect/c0122a41-555d-4e7a-a23b-aae29e9f9aa9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] -Colin (CJN)
Tell us about yourself.
I’m the co-founder and designer of Informale, a Melbourne-based menswear brand. I’ve worked in fashion retail my entire professional life, and being able to pursue the craft properly now feels like a dream realised. I love travelling and often use Informale as an excuse to explore the world with my wife and daughter. When I’m not in menswear mode I’m usually spending time with my girls. I love music: I listen to an eclectic mix of sounds - from old-school hip hop to drum and bass. I also love going for a drive in my old Audi - you’ll find me zooming some curvy mountainous roads at sunrise (at the speed limit, of course).
Describe your media diet.
Instagram is my go-to for keeping up with friends and the menswear world; X for finance and tech (I love the ability to use Grok to fact-check and add context in real time); and YouTube (YT premium is my pro-tip) for cars, menswear, and the occasional UFO deep dive. For those in need of a deep rabbit hole, I recommend American Alchemy by Jesse Michels.
In print, I’m a big fan of WM Brown magazine by Matt Hranek. His work is a rare treat these days, focusing on meaningful pursuits, travel, food, and living well. The “Drive” section is always a favourite - one story I always remember is a guy called Vincent Fauch who told this incredibly detailed and heartfelt story of his Porsche 996 4S, his connection to the car as a kid, finally being able to buy one (and find it in the perfect spec), and his subsequent journeys and experiences camping with it around Europe thanks to the rooftop tent he installed. This kind of real, raw, enthusiast-level stuff is what I really love about Matt’s work.
What’s the last great book you read?
It’s a tie between Manufacturing Consent by Noam Chomsky and Confessions of an Economic Hitman by John Perkins. I’m drawn to anything that peeks behind the curtain of power - both are fascinating takes on how the world really works, and help me to tune out a lot of the daily noise and negativity.
What are you reading now?
I’ve been about one-third of the way through America Before by Graham Hancock for about two years - just can’t seem to find the time to finish it, as much as I want to. It goes deep into the history of the Americas, and suggests a fairly advanced Ice Age civilization may have existed and would have been wiped out just before the beginning of our “modern” historical period. Echoes of it’s monolithic architecture, religion and culture echo throughout the world.
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favourite publication?
I’ll usually start by checking the index for stories or topics that jump out. If I’m lucky enough to have some extra time, I’ll flick through the rest.
Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
The Monocle Guide to Shops, Kiosks and Markets. In a world where global brands and big-box retailers dominate media ad-space and therefore our attention, an entire book dedicated to small, independent and often quirky retailers around the world is a breath of fresh air. Highly recommend!
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
OBDeleven. It lets me troubleshoot and clear fault codes while driving my old car - my fellow enthusiasts will understand.
Plane or train?
Plane, simply due to distance. Australia is a minimum 6-hour flight to anywhere (unlike our friends in Europe), and luckily Bali is about that far away. You’ll find us there a couple times a year, sipping on Coconuts and taking things extremely slow.
What is one place everyone should visit?
Puglia, Italy. It’s like stepping back in time 20+ years, and the pasta, oh my god. Don’t bother trying to understand the local dialect, it’s insane.
Tell us about a rabbit hole you fell deep into.
I fall into rabbit holes all the time. There’s something deeply satisfying about going all-in on a topic or niche and understanding why it draws others in.
As a teenager, I once picked a book off my parents’ shelf called Fingerprints of the Gods by Graham Hancock. Ever since reading it, I’ve been secretly obsessed with the idea of a lost ancient civilisation that predates our current timeline that may have been wiped out around 12,000 years ago. It’s a pretty mind-blowing concept at first, but funnily enough it ends up making a lot of sense. (SC)

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93aHlpc3RoaXNpbnRlcmVzdGluZy5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vYWN0aW9uL2Rpc2FibGVfZW1haWw_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveE5EVTJNek14T1N3aWNHOXpkRjlwWkNJNk1Ua3lOamcxTlRBMkxDSnBZWFFpT2pFM056WXdOemN3TWprc0ltVjRjQ0k2TVRnd056WXhNekF5T1N3aWFYTnpJam9pY0hWaUxUY3dNREFpTENKemRXSWlPaUprYVhOaFlteGxYMlZ0WVdsc0luMC5JZG5yUmc2REcwNU5iM3VXaVVsNS1UQlUzWHBvLWNKZWpPZzY2UE8yWTQ4IiwicCI6MTkyNjg1NTA2LCJzIjo3MDAwLCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzc2MDc3MDI5LCJleHAiOjIwOTE2NTMwMjksImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.Ss2p6gWMO4TsVwkBx72A-AnXoH0_A4YOp8ojts2uGQ0?