View this post on the web at https://whyisthisinteresting.substack.com/p/the-monday-media-diet-with-remy-solomon

Remy Solomon creates one of the sharpest cultural commentary around. She’s a TV writer, and I also love her social footprint (IG, TT) and she also writes Exquisite Taste. [ https://substack.com/redirect/862c961f-dd66-40b6-93a3-32829a1cdb0d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] -CJN
Tell us about yourself.
After a childhood spent battling monthly strep throat, bimonthly yeast infections, and an annual exotic disease (scarlet fever, anyone?)--all of which was compounded by run-of-the-mill Jewish anxiety– I have a fear of death that my therapist finds worrisome, but which is wholly beneficial for my manager and entertainment lawyer. Because in order to avoid thinking about how there is probably no afterlife, I like to keep busy with lots of work.
I used to consider myself a writer; if I were to use a blanket term these days, it would be “storyteller.” Annoying, I know. I was originally a playwright (not a very good one), then a romance novelist (a pretty good one), then a scribe for radio theatre (didn’t try that hard), and currently, happily, blissfully, a TV writer. I’ve written on a Fox series, staffed in mini rooms, developed shows with Apple, Sony, CBS, Chernin, Bell…whatever, you don’t want my resume. Point is, I believe in old-fashioned TV the way some people believe in God. I think the five-act structure is tantamount to a religious text, I love teasers and tags, and I hope Grey’s Anatomy runs another hundred years.
But, in addition to all that– and probably the reason I was summoned to write this dispatch– I am also a content creator. How did that happen? Well, because I just yearned to receive hate comments from men in Iowa who had never seen a bleached blonde bisexual before. Kidding. The sincere answer is that much of my work has happened behind the scenes, which is cool and I am grateful for employment but also, development is kinda isolating. So I started posting on TikTok and then Instagram and occasionally Substack and now I have over 100k followers across platforms and have done brand deals with companies like Netflix, A24, Neon, TheRealReal and more.
So, hire me to write on your show (contact 42 Management), or pay me to talk about your company (contact Proud Management)…or ask me to do something else, I dunno, I’ll probably say yes (contact me at remysolomonpro@gmail.com [ mailto:remysolomonpro@gmail.com ])
Describe your media diet.
I wake up every morning on high alert. This is either the by-product of growing up a swimmer and having to haul ass out of bed for 5am practices–or I was an artillery gunner in another life and my somatic system still thinks the British are coming.
My version of reading the news is opening the fifty million Substacks in my inbox. I am particularly fond of Kaitlin Phillips’ Gift Guide and Natasha Stagg’s Selling Out, both of which embody an effortless cool that will forever escape me, a consummate try-hard. Like apparently everyone else who has written this column, I read Feed Me, which pairs nicely with my friend John’s newsletter, The Eastside Rag. I also like After School, Snake Super Health…you get the drift.
After I finish reading whatever delicious little treats have been deposited by the AOL stork (yeah, I’m still on AOL, fuck off), I move on to NYMag. I love those crazy girls, they’re always up to something! And then I hit Deadline for some galvanizing self-loathing. Why isn’t my name in one of these headlines? They hired HIM to adapt that IP? Wait, they told me that show wasn’t staffing lower levels! Those bastards.
As I storm around my kitchen, muttering about how I was robbed, robbed I tell you! – I listen to podcasts. I am a long-time fan of, among many others, The Cutting Room Floor, New Models, Nymphet Alumni, Doomscroll and Where Should We Begin? I also returned to LA Podcast during this mind-numbing election cycle, and have been dipping my toes into Disintegrator.
After that, I like to just steep my brain in a melange of algorithms–TikTok, Instagram, Reddit, Twitter–until I lose all sense of self and become one with the Big Computer in the Sky.
What’s the last great book you read?
I don’t know if I’m allowed to talk about this, but in the spirit of asking for forgiveness not permission…I’m gonna do it anyway. Laura Leffler’s new book Art People is astonishing. It’s coming out in 2028 and I don’t want to spoil anything so I’ll just say that when I finished the book, I 1) wept for 15 minutes about what it means to be a woman and 2) immediately asked to option it.
What are you reading now?
I finally started Ben Lerner’s Transcription. Where’s my medal?! I liked Leaving the Atocha Station, so I’ve been looking forward to this one.
What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication?
I’m sorry to say that it has been ages since I read a print publication. But I used to be obsessed with Vanity Fair. Like, wrote-Graydon-Carter-fan-emails-obsessed. I would read it cover-to-cover, everything from the editor’s letter to the Proust Questionnaire.
Who should everyone be reading that they’re not?
So glad you asked–you should be reading OCCRP, or the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project. This isn’t gonna make a lot of sense, but it almost feels like reading William Gibson’s Neuromancer. Walk with me here. Good criminals engage with the present in a way major studios do not; they’re constantly experimenting with novel technology, and they love to exploit emergent systems. It also gives me a good temp check on what I should actually be worried about in the endless deluge of things I could be worried about, and what’s just a nothingburger.
What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone?
The photo-editing app y2K. I love to take a Klonopin and go to town on that bad boy.
Plane or train?
Plane. I am from Los Angeles, so I don’t romanticize commutes. I’m also completely unafraid of public confrontation, so if somebody puts a naked, callused foot in the gap between their chair and my armrest, I will swat them away with a safety manual.
What is one place everyone should visit?
Montreal. Best city on earth. The kindest people, the finest food, and the sickest parties. Yes, I have written a whole travelogue about my week in Montreal, it’s up on Immaculate Taste.
Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into.
Offshore oil rigs. 120 people from radically different walks of life, co-existing in the middle of nowhere for three to four weeks at a time, forced to rely on one another if they want to survive the night? I mean, that’s theater, baby. I got into it by reading Fire on the Horizon, which is ostensibly a book about the BP Oil Spill but is really a book about the culture aboard rigs. And yes, before you ask–I am already taking out a pitch set in this world. So get your grubby mitts off!!

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93aHlpc3RoaXNpbnRlcmVzdGluZy5zdWJzdGFjay5jb20vYWN0aW9uL2Rpc2FibGVfZW1haWw_dG9rZW49ZXlKMWMyVnlYMmxrSWpveE5EVTJNek14T1N3aWNHOXpkRjlwWkNJNk1qQXlPVGswTVRBNExDSnBZWFFpT2pFM09EUTFORFF5T1RNc0ltVjRjQ0k2TVRneE5qQTRNREk1TXl3aWFYTnpJam9pY0hWaUxUY3dNREFpTENKemRXSWlPaUprYVhOaFlteGxYMlZ0WVdsc0luMC5iVFd5LWd3WW5IdVhlNjBhS2dZU3QzcWxZOXBiX001WGkyU2NYaHJBSGRzIiwicCI6MjAyOTk0MTA4LCJzIjo3MDAwLCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzg0NTQ0MjkzLCJleHAiOjIxMDAxMjAyOTMsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.NUWYt_zihxxN8vFxqe4KE7Ca19Rd-zFmLXPyc8uIRkQ?