"Consistency is the virtue of small minds."

 ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏ ͏­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­

96

Hey friends,

Before I get into today’s new post, two announcements:

(1) Penguin Random House Grupo Editorial has bought the Spanish
rights to The Inner Compass (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/n2hohvhv6qlw63t0/aHR0cHM6Ly9nZW5pLnVzL2lubmVyY29tcGFzcw==
) (in an auction)! I’m so excited for the book to be translated
and distributed to the many Spanish-speaking countries across the
world.

The foreign interest in the book has been quite astounding, and
is a testament to its universal message. It doesn’t matter who
you are or where you’re from, as the forces of conditioning are
ever-present. The question is how you can cultivate the courage
to have conviction in your actions, regardless of how uncertain
the outcome may be.

That’s what The Inner Compass (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/n2hohvhv6qlw63t0/aHR0cHM6Ly9nZW5pLnVzL2lubmVyY29tcGFzcw==
) is all about, and if you’ve read it, please hit reply to let me
know what you thought of it. I love hearing from you, and I hope
you’ll join me in spreading the word.

(2) I just got back from Korea after a wonderful stay with my
parents. The fall season there was beautiful as you can see from
this photo of a nearby park:

Now that I’m back after a multi-month stay abroad, I’ll be doing
another interview run to talk about The Inner Compass (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/n2hohvhv6qlw63t0/aHR0cHM6Ly9nZW5pLnVzL2lubmVyY29tcGFzcw==
). I declined almost all requests while traveling so I can focus
on my family, but I’ll be opening my schedule up in late November
and December to have conversations about it.

If you have a podcast or YouTube channel and would like to have
me on, hit reply to introduce yourself and your show. And also,
please reach out only if you’ve read my book or are planning to
read it before our chat. Thank you.

All right, now onto today’s post, which is a reflection on
consistency.

I’ve never quite resonated with the advice to “keep showing up,
no matter what.” While you may gain personal benefits from this
line of thinking, it is very possible that you’ll start giving up
the depth you can build with others.

This will require some unpacking, so today’s reflection will just
do that. When you’re ready, let’s dive right in.

​The Pitfalls of Consistency (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/wnh2hghqx7l9xxsl/aHR0cHM6Ly9tb3JldG90aGF0LmNvbS90aGUtcGl0ZmFsbHMtb2YtY29uc2lzdGVuY3kv
)​

(
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/wnh2hghqx7l9xxsl/aHR0cHM6Ly9tb3JldG90aGF0LmNvbS90aGUtcGl0ZmFsbHMtb2YtY29uc2lzdGVuY3kv
)

“Consistency is the virtue of small minds.” — Alan Watts

When I first heard that quote in one of Watts’ talks, it gave me
pause. I believe it was from a talk on Daoism, where he was
describing the intricate balance that exists between any two
poles. The general argument was that we live in a society that
heralds consistency, yet the universe is essentially the
antithesis of that. There is nothing constant about the domain
of existence, but we delude ourselves into thinking that it’s
attainable in the context of our own lives.

This does a good job highlighting my own tension with
consistency, especially in the domain of one’s beliefs and
habits. On one hand, consistency is a surrogate for stability,
which signals trust. It’s the only way for us to predict what
might happen tomorrow given someone’s past behaviors. And once a
discernible pattern of behavior arises, we use that to determine
whether or not a person is deemed reliable.

But on the other hand, consistency is an adherence to rigidity,
and keeps people chained to an identity that they may no longer
resonate with. We see this often in politics, for example, where
a candidate’s track record is determined by how long they’ve held
a certain view throughout their career. Even if their mind has
changed about that view (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/08hwh9h2gep0gqup/aHR0cHM6Ly9tb3JldG90aGF0LmNvbS90aGUtcG93ZXItb2YtdGhlLWRpc3NlbnRpbmctdm9pY2Uv
), they can’t communicate it openly because that would foreshadow
the loss of their seat. It’s this kind of consistency that Watts
is speaking of when he refers to the small minds who adopt it.

As a writer, there’s a common narrative that consistency is the
virtue that should reign supreme over your work. Whether you
publish daily, weekly, or monthly, there should be some
predictable cadence you choose that signals a sense of
reliability to your audience. That it’s through this chain of
unbroken promises that trust is ultimately cultivated.

While I understand the rationale behind this, one thing I’ve
realized is that as a reader, I don’t seem to pay much attention
to a writer’s consistency. I don’t read someone’s work because
they publish something every Friday. No, I read them because
their work is great (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/vqh3hrhoe0q2eliw/aHR0cHM6Ly9tb3JldG90aGF0LmNvbS9wdXJzdWUtbWFzdGVyeS1ub3Qtc3RhdHVzLw==
), regardless of the time of week in which it was published. I
prefer depth of thought over adherence to cadence, and that holds
true for any work of art.

But at the same time, consistency does have its virtues.
Whenever I see an article from that creator in my inbox on
Friday, it’s a way of them stating, “Hey, I showed up this week,
just like I said I would.” Even if I don’t engage with that
email at all, it’s a small indicator that they were present for
the occasion. And oftentimes, that’s enough for me to believe
that they’re serious about their craft.

In my case, I don’t have a set schedule for this newsletter, but
I publish regularly enough so you can expect to hear from me when
I have something to say. And by continuing to share my work with
you in this way, I further develop that bond of trust. Simply
put, I use consistency as a means to delve deeper, and the only
way to cultivate depth is to first establish this familiarity
with you.

This highlights an important thing: Consistency is beautiful when
it’s used to build deeper connections, but becomes burdensome
when you use it solely for personal gain. The reason why I don’t
like the common advice of “publish every (insert cadence here)”
is because it often comes from people that are giving advice on
growing an audience. It uses consistency as a prop for your
personal gain, which is to grow an audience to serve some
personal goal - be it the desire for money (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/m2h7h5h3m5lkmztl/aHR0cHM6Ly9tb3JldG90aGF0LmNvbS9ob3ctbW9uZXktZm9yZXZlci1jaGFuZ2VkLXVzLw==
) or the pursuit of fame. And whenever it’s used in this way,
you grow weary because self-interest is a tiresome endeavor. One
can only serve their own goals for so long before it feels
tedious and never-ending.

But if you’re showing up at a regular time because you truly care
about the relationships you’re building, then consistency is
indeed a virtue. That’s why we check in with our friends
regularly, attend our children’s games, and show up to work on
time. These all signal that we care about the people we’re
interacting with, and that we aspire to build a reputation that
exudes this commitment.

Consistency is a virtue of the compassionate mind, but a mere
tool for the selfish one. Wisdom is in knowing when to embody
consistency to cultivate depth, and when to accept serendipity to
open up the mind. By regularly oscillating between the two, you
realize that adherence to any one pole is a futile endeavor, and
are made aware of the declaration that the Daoists made many
millennia ago.

That’s it for today’s reflection. Was there anything that
resonated? Anything that didn’t? Hit reply to let me know.

As a reminder, if you grab a copy of The Inner Compass (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/n2hohvhv6qlw63t0/aHR0cHM6Ly9nZW5pLnVzL2lubmVyY29tcGFzcw==
), send me your order receipt so I can send you a bonus booklet
of 30 daily meditations. These reflections have been carefully
selected to give you a mindful start to each day.

Thanks for reading, and feel free to share this email with anyone
who might enjoy it. Have a great rest of your week!

-Lawrence Yeo

P.S. Thanks to all the wonderful people that support the blog on
Patreon! It means so much. If you’d like to support More To That
and get access to book recommendations, exclusive AMAs, offline
posts, and other reflections, join as a patron today (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/e0hph7h7qvd9q3s7/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cucGF0cmVvbi5jb20vbW9yZXRvdGhhdA==
).

P.P.S. If you want to learn how to write essays like the one I
shared today, check out my writing course, The Examined Writer (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/z2hghnhep6m9pmsz/aHR0cHM6Ly9leGFtaW5lZHdyaXRlci5jb20v
). It’s 3 hours’ of self-paced material, all designed to elevate
your writing practice.

(
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/z2hghnhep6m9pmsz/aHR0cHM6Ly9leGFtaW5lZHdyaXRlci5jb20v
)

​

If you were forwarded this email, subscribe to the More To That
newsletter and get the next edition in your inbox.

-->Subscribe here (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/6qheh8hlnr3vovh9/aHR0cHM6Ly9tb3JldG90aGF0LmNvbS9uZXdzbGV0dGVyLw==
)
Subscribe here ( https://moretothat.com/newsletter/ )

View this email in your browser (
https://click.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5/58hvh7hgkx4p7nc7/aHR0cHM6Ly9ja2FyY2hpdmUuY29tL2IvZ2t1bmg1aGxwZWQ0ZWF6b2RkOW9rdTh3ZTNlOTlpbWgyZ2x4bA==
)

Copyright © 2025 More To That, All rights reserved.

If you'd like to change your subscriber profile (such
as your email address), click here (
https://preferences.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5
).

To unsubscribe from all future mailings, click here (
https://unsubscribe.kit-mail6.com/zlu3rwxgprinhkwo4qohphwogmg00a6h3o5e5
). Thanks for the time you've spent here with me.

120 E Chevy Chase Dr #250994, Glendale, CA 91225