View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/battling-the-blaze

Welcome to Looking Through the Past! At its heart, this is a project in which I find a bunch of cool stuff every week and share it with you. It takes hours of research and writing to produce. If you’re new here, click the button below to subscribe. If you’re already a free subscriber who appreciates getting a bunch of cool stuff in your inbox every week, please consider a paid subscription, for less than $1 a week.
I thought I knew how I was going to introduce this week’s topic — some fascinating artifacts from the history of firefighting — but it seems that I’ve hit a snag. 
Let me explain. In our wealth-obsessed society, there’s one thing that reliably attracts attention: the Rich Guy. People pay an immense amount of attention to what we used to call the Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous [ https://substack.com/redirect/da222a46-c321-4f97-b5f1-7542eeb699cb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. If you’re like most Americans, your brain is cluttered with facts or suppositions about Elon’s kids, Bezos’ divorce, Warren Buffett’s car, and all sorts of other stuff about Rich Guys that is much less important for you to remember than that meeting you forgot about earlier today. 
Our fascination with Rich Guys is sometimes a product of admiration — we want to understand their ways so that we can be more like them — and sometimes a result of envy and resentment — we want to revel in the fact that all the money in the world can’t save these guys from misfortune. 
The Rich Guy obsession applies to historical figures, too. There’s a steady stream of historical content about the Rich Guys of History, whether robber barons like Carnegie and Rockefeller or ancient plutocrats like Mansa Musa or the Rich Guy I want to discuss today, Marcus Licinius Crassus, a member of Rome’s First Triumvirate. 
Much of the Rich Guys of History content on the internet, it must be said, is quite low quality — it’s clear that people google them a lot, so there’s a lot of clickbait and content-farmed stuff that comes up toward the top of the search results. Much of it is thinly sourced or exaggerated for effect — search for the “richest person in history,” and you’ll enjoy a lukewarm buffet of AI slop combined with slapdash currency conversion and inflation calculation. 
It’s difficult if not impossible to convert the wealth of a guy like Crassus into modern terms; even if we take the value of all the gold he owned and convert it into dollars at today’s prices, how can we account for all of the slaves he owned or the fact that, for all his wealth, he didn’t have, like, a refrigerator or a telephone?
The value of Crassus’ holdings is not the only thing that the Rich Guy of History websites fail to convey accurately. Take, for example, a commonly-repeated story about the source of Crassus’ wealth — that he operated a “fire brigade [ https://substack.com/redirect/3ab2cb07-31d3-447d-ba9d-9b68de0a13a3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]” whose purpose was, well, I’ll let the New Yorker’s Hendrik Hertzberg explain [ https://substack.com/redirect/74e3fc59-c47a-4558-b1d1-2d9e4a29ee25?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]:
Crassus had his own private fire department, and if your house caught fire his representatives would offer to buy it on the spot, at a one-time-only, fire-sale price that would fall rapidly as the flames climbed. If you said yes, you’d get a few sesterces, after which Crassus’ firefighters would do their thing. If you said no, you’d end up with a pile of ashes. 
Hertzberg’s anecdote is based on a passage from Plutarch [ https://substack.com/redirect/b5f1a00b-08ed-4126-b206-c122679bd6f9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]:
And besides this, observing how natural and familiar at Rome were such fatalities as the conflagration and collapse of buildings, owing to their being too massive and close together, he proceeded to buy slaves who were architects and builders. Then, when he had over five hundred of these, he would buy houses that were afire, and houses which adjoined those that were afire, and these their owners would let go at a trifling price owing to their fear and uncertainty. In this way the largest part of Rome came into his possession.
But, beyond this passage (and Plutarch was known to spice up his narratives if he was trying to make a point), there’s really… nothing else to support this idea that pops up again and again in the popular history of Crassus. 
As Roman historian Liv Mariah Yarrow [ https://substack.com/redirect/cb8ee3f1-bd8a-4d26-a2fe-efcc46427343?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] found when she dug into the matter, this is something that “everyone KNOWS” but is weakly sourced and quite possibly misunderstood. There seem to have been a lot of private fire brigades. Crassus’ organization may not have been unusual, or it may have had other purposes (protecting his own property, for example). Its importance to his wealth is probably exaggerated. 
So the tidy story I was going to start with — Crassus’ fire brigades as the beginning of firefighting history — seems a little too tidy. Yes, ancient Rome had firefighters (their most important job was probably spotting fires before they grew). Other ancient societies must have had them, as well, although clear evidence is hard to come by. 
So, sorry — I don’t have a just-so story about the ancient origins of firefighting. What we do know is this: fire has plagued urban society since its beginning, and these societies have worked to prevent and fight fire for most of that history. 
Despite the danger of fire, organized, professional municipal firefighting is a pretty recent invention. It wasn’t until 1824 that Edinborough established a taxpayer-supported, full-time fire company (Cincinnati was the first American city to do so, in 1853, although some cities had volunteer firefighters prior to that date). 
Before the advent of municipal firefighters, homeowners had to buy fire insurance. Insurance entitled the policyholder to the services of a company’s fire brigade in the case of an emergency. But how would the fire brigades know which houses were covered by which companies? Insurance firms marked their territory with fire marks — metal or ceramic plaques that designated a building’s insurance provider. They had to be made of fireproof materials because the insurance companies sometimes wouldn’t pay a claim until the mark was found in the rubble of a burned building.
These marks still dot old buildings in British and American cities, and many of them are quite attractive. 
This one comes from early-19th-century London:
And this one from Norwich:
I enjoy this dragon-themed one from late-19th-century Singapore:
Some featured firefighting equipment, like this serpentine-looking hose on one from Philadelphia:
Or this early fire engine from Darlington, England:
But the most excellent fire mark has to be this one from the Commercial Union Assurance Company in London, which shows a dragon amidst the flames. Who says insurance has to be boring?
What about the firefighters themselves? In the nineteenth century, they didn’t have the advanced equipment that they do today to protect them from the dangers of their job. But this doesn’t mean they didn’t take great pride in their attire. I love the early fire hats — stovepipe hats, mace of felt or leather, that didn’t offer a ton of protection but did advertise the fire company and often the wearer himself. They’re charmingly hand-decorated:
Ben Franklin, the founder of the United States’ first volunteer fire company, was a frequent subject:
While others featured other patriotic figures:
Some simply tried to embody the emotions that firefighters must have desperately wanted to provide to the community:
By the late nineteenth century, the modern fire helmet — made initially of leather — provided more protection, but they still were charmingly hand-painted. This one, appropriately, features a phoenix rising from the ashes:
The most excellent fire-protection apparel, however, came from Japan. Japanese firefighters wore reversible coats made of quilted cotton. They would soak the coats in water before they went into the flames. Their task was usually to create a fire break by destroying structures around the burning building; water supplies were insufficient to extinguish large fires. 
These coats were decorated with remarkable mythological designs; the men would often turn the coats inside out [ https://substack.com/redirect/ed8efb80-f869-4098-b544-98b511ccb922?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] so that the designs would not be harmed when they entered the blaze.  
Here’s one with an image of a Toad Spirit that taught humans magic:
Others had pictures of legendary warriors, whose bravery would have inspired the firefighters (this one features Rōrihakucho Chō Jun):
Some were quite literal, like this coat showing a warrior fighting the spirit of fire:
While others evoked the peace and quiet of nature:
Later, the coats were made of leather, which was more protective. This one has the fire company’s beautifully stylized logo on the back:
Over time, of course, firefighters developed more modern protective technology, especially for the danger that came from smoke inhalation. This is an early design from the Warsaw fire department:
Some of the equipment made them look positively alien, like these gas masks worn by Australian firefighters in 1927:
Or these worn by Norwegians in 1941:
It takes a special type of person to sign up for a job that involves risking your life, breathing smoke, and battling deadly flames — especially at a time when the technology that might protect them was so primitive. So I’ll leave you with some images of the firefighters themselves. Here’s the Jarrow Ladies Fire Brigade, called into service when most of the men from this town near Newcastle were called up for World War I:
Here we have the Athabasca, Alberta fire brigade, who presumably had to battle wildfire more than urban conflagrations:
And here’s a Seattle-area “hose team” posing during some kind of tournament, in 1889, the same year that Seattle’s “Great Fire” occurred. Some of the men in the picture would later fall into Puget Sound when a burning dock collapsed beneath their fire wagon:
One final image — of firefighters in action, carrying an injured person on a stretcher. I love this one; it shows the calm and competence amidst chaos that is the hallmark of the firefighter:
Though the origins of firefighting may be murky, its purpose is clear. Firefighters are there to assist us during unthinkable tragedies, risking their lives to save people and their possessions. The slogans that were painted [ https://substack.com/redirect/8154337a-8cde-4703-afd3-42be6434560f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] on early fire engines say it all:
“United We Stand, Divided We Fall.”
“Non Sibi Sed Omnibus” ("Not for self, but for all.")
“When Duty Calls, Tis Ours to Obey.”
“Semper Paratus” ("Always Ready")
And, my favorite, “We'll Try.”
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
Or you can share the newsletter with others:
Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.Exc0chByDui71VsiX4Ci3yyMdgKPV_lsPM2-1QKd6Ns?