View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/the-ottoman-mirror

You probably know the story of the Dutch tulip mania. It’s a high-school-economics-class staple: a perfect example of uncontrolled speculation, of the way the boom leads to the inevitable bust.
But not as many people know the Dutch got hooked on tulip bulbs in the first place. Tulips aren’t native to Europe; they originally came from the Ottoman Empire. A Frenchman named Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq, the Holy Roman Emperor’s representative in Constantinople, brought them back in the 1550s along with a wealth of other knowledge about the huge empire to the east of Europe. 
Busbecq traveled all over the Ottoman Empire, collecting plants, coins, and artifacts. He reported back about previously unknown (to Europeans) Roman temples and obscure languages. He wrote a series of letters describing what he saw; these were later compiled into a book called, straightforwardly, Turkish Letters:
Busbecq found much to admire about Turkish society; his tone is one of fascination [ https://substack.com/redirect/af33dbc7-1901-4b7d-afce-b8429a96e366?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. In his eyes, Ottoman culture is enticing and exotic, its government is powerful, and its culture is impressive:
Now come with me and cast your eye over the immense crowd of turbaned heads, wrapped in countless folds of the whitest silk, and bright raiment of every kind and hue, and everywhere the brilliance of gold, silver, purple, silk, and satin. A detailed description would be a lengthy task, and no mere words could give an adequate idea of the novelty of the sight. A more beautiful spectacle was never presented to my gaze. Yet amid all this luxury there was a great simplicity and economy. The dress of all has the same form whatever the wearer’s rank; and no edgings or useless trimmings are sewn on, as is the custom with us, costing a large sum of money and worn out in three days. Their most beautiful garments of silk or satin, even if they are embroidered, as they usually are, cost only a ducat to make.
This was not, it’s fair to say, the consensus view in Western Europe at the time. Especially since their conquest of Constantinople in 1453, the Turks had been seen as the Other, the barbarian force that had destroyed the last remnants of Rome. 
This fear and loathing of the Ottomans was a reflection of European Christians’ fear and loathing of one another. In the chaos of the Protestant Reformation, various camps of Christians used the threat of the Turks to explain why their Christian enemies were dangerous. As Ottoman armies pushed into Europe, Martin Luther [ https://substack.com/redirect/527167fd-d852-4d59-b62d-2075590ee571?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] used the threat that they posed as a weapon with which to attack the Papacy. He implied that the Turks were irredeemable and were being used by God to punish the Catholic Church for losing its way. 
The Turk is the rod of the wrath of the Lord our God. . . If the Turk's god, the devil, is not beaten first, there is reason to fear that the Turk will not be so easy to beat. . . Christian weapons and power must do it. . .
(The fight against the Turks) must begin with repentance, and we must reform our lives, or we shall fight in vain.
(The Church should) drive men to repentance by showing our great and numberless sins and our ingratitude, by which we have earned God's wrath and disfavor, so that He justly gives us into the hands of the devil and the Turk.
Paid subscriptions keep this project afloat! 
Some Europeans didn’t seem to think of Ottomans as anything more than a savage Other. Albrecht Dürer in 1496 portrayed a Turkish family as uncivilized — the wife is half-naked and barefoot, and the husband is a fierce warrior.
After the Ottoman siege of Vienna in 1529, Turks loomed large in the European imagination. Germans spoke of Turkengefahr [ https://substack.com/redirect/9503c367-b3ec-4c68-9645-2ec3e01c4fa3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], the “danger of the Turk.” Illustrations at the time portrayed the Ottomans doing monstrous things, like chopping up Christian babies:
But it was hard to maintain this dismissive attitude in the face of the greatness of the Ottoman Empire at its peak. European travelers like Busbecq began to visit Ottoman territory more often and report back to Europe with a more open mind.
Some works of art focused on the Sultans who governed this vast empire. Gentile Bellini, a Venetian painter, had generally painted prominent Italians. But when Sultan Mehmet II wanted an Italian artist to come to his palace and paint him, Bellini answered the call. His portrait of the Sultan is more realistic than many other portrayals of the Turks from the late 1400s:
Other works of art emphasized the immense power of the Sultan. Several artists portrayed Suleyman the Magnificent wearing an elaborate helmet, which is really four crowns stacked on top of one another. It was meant to be a symbol of the Sultan’s immense power and a rebuke to the Holy Roman Emperor. Did Suleyman ever wear such a thing? Nobody knows, but the helmet was displayed to European visitors from time to time, and rumors spread about its immense value:
Suleyman was widely respected in Europe. Busbecq describes [ https://substack.com/redirect/fa8038b1-f4cd-4892-978d-c7cde7d1ca2e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] him this way: ". . .his majestic bearing and indeed his whole demeanor are such as beseem the lord of so vast an empire. He has always had the character of being a careful and temperate man; even in his early days . . . his life was blameless . . . “
A Danish printmaker named Melchior Lorck also created an image of Suleyman standing before a war elephant, which symbolized the military power of the empire, and the Hagia Sophia mosque, which illustrates the history and culture of his lands (the image was later changed to name the sultan as Ibrahim, not Suleyman):
This portrait of Suleyman, also by Lorck, feels quite modern, but it’s from 1562:
Lorck, who was part of the same embassy as Busbecq, didn’t just capture the Ottoman rulers but all sorts of aspects of life in the empire. He depicted elements of the Turkish army, like this Spahi cavalryman:
This infantryman:
The famous janissaries:
And this “corpulent Turkish soldier:”
But Lorck’s interests went beyond the military. He depicted Ottoman architecture like this mosque:
And this town:
Along with scenes of everyday life, like this harpist at work:
A Dutch printmaker named Pieter Coecke also spent time in Constantinople during this period, not as part of an official delegation but on an entrepreneurial mission: he wanted the Sultan to commission some tapestries. This didn’t work, but he made many drawings during his year in the Ottoman Empire, which were collected in a book published in the 1550s called Customs and Fashions of the Turks.
The illustrations in this book are generally designed to show multitudes of people going about their business. 
They show the Ottoman Empire as a place full of beautiful landscapes and industrious people:
They showed everything from celebrations:
To funerals:
After a while, these fairly realistic images of life in the Ottoman Empire were supplanted by depictions of the exoticism  of the people there. It became trendy in Italy to wear turbans, and European rulers would hold masquerades in Turkish dress. Depictions of Ottomans made them seem elegant, as in this drawing by Jacques Callot:
Europeans might furnish their home with a clock featuring a generic “Turk:”
There was a special interest in women’s lives in the Ottoman world, especially harems:
Europeans moved rather quickly from fear of the “invincible” Ottomans to a genuine interest to an early version of the Orientalist attitude that the empire to the east was luxurious and exotic. By the 19th century, as Donald Quataert writes [ https://substack.com/redirect/67aae44f-23c1-438c-9c83-70a202d10687?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], 
European imaginings marked the Ottoman East as the degenerate site of pleasures supposedly absent or forbidden in the civilized and vigorous West, where Europeans by contrast allegedly were restrained, sober, just, sexually controlled, moderate, and rational.
Much of the time, Europeans seem to have viewed the Ottoman Empire not as a society deserving of a close and honest look but as a kind of mirror. The Ottomans were seen as whatever the Europeans were not — a vicious threat, a decadent temptation. That’s why I find the illustrations of Melchior Lorck and Pieter Coecke so interesting: they represent an attempt to take an honest look at a society that Europeans seemed determined to misunderstand. 
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
You can share the newsletter with others:
You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.osprppkD2qE78Mr41v5aA9fFDwoyZp2GP1QMmy-9jqY?