View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/the-futurist-trap

The way he told it, Filippo Tommaso Marinetti was never quite the same after that car crash. Driving around Milan in 1908 — in the days when driving a car was for daredevils, not bored commuters — Marinetti narrowly avoided some cyclists and plowed his car into a ditch. He climbed out a different person. As he put it, in his typically florid style:
O maternal ditch, almost full of muddy water! Fair factory drain! I gulped down your nourishing sludge; and I remembered the blessed black beast of my Sudanese nurse… When I came up — torn, filthy, and stinking — from under the capsized car, I felt the white-hot iron of joy deliciously pass through my heart!
The experience moved Marinetti and his friends to form a new artistic movement, which they called Futurism, that would celebrate the new and destroy the old. The next year, Marinetti issued the Futurist Manifesto [ https://substack.com/redirect/1969dd58-e3f8-47ad-92da-3c0baa9d8f69?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
Marinetti declared that he wanted his movement to be one of drastic action:
We intend to sing the love of danger, the habit of energy and fearlessness….
We intend to exalt aggressive action, a feverish insomnia, the racer’s stride, the mortal leap, the punch and the slap.
He aligned his movement with the excitement that new technologies brought:
We affirm that the world’s magnificence has been enriched by a new beauty: the beauty of speed. A racing car whose hood is adorned with great pipes, like serpents of explosive breath — a roaring car that seems to ride on grapeshot is more beautiful than the Victory of Samothrace.
He exalted the man of action, who was willing to make progress while others were too hidebound or cowardly:
We want to hymn the man at the wheel, who hurls the lance of his spirit across the Earth, along the circle of its orbit.
Except in struggle, there is no more beauty. No work without an aggressive character can be a masterpiece.
And he disdained the ideas that would tie society to the past:
We stand on the last promontory of the centuries!… Why should we look back, when what we want is to break down the mysterious doors of the Impossible? Time and Space died yesterday. We already live in the absolute, because we have created eternal, omnipresent speed.
We will destroy the museums, libraries, academies of every kind, will fight moralism, feminism, every opportunistic or utilitarian cowardice.
The Futurist Manifesto became a sensation — its fearless, intense, off-kilter style and ideas made it the talk of European intellectual society.
Thanks for reading! If you like what you see, please consider becoming a free or paid subscriber. Paid subscribers get access to the archives and the warm feeling of supporting something they like!
A little more than a century later, one of the world’s richest men decided to pay homage to Marinetti’s radical ideas. Marc Andreessen, the venture capitalist billionaire, decided in 2023 that the world needed to hear his Techno-Optimist Manifesto [ https://substack.com/redirect/db590d87-1327-4dd7-ab0e-93a45761082e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. In it, he made direct reference to Marinetti’s declaration from 1909:
To paraphrase a manifesto of a different time and place: “Beauty exists only in struggle. There is no masterpiece that has not an aggressive character. Technology must be a violent assault on the forces of the unknown, to force them to bow before man.”
The parallels didn’t end there. Andreessen declared that he wanted his movement to be one of drastic action:
“We believe in ambition, aggression, persistence, relentlessness…”
He aligned his movement with the excitement that new technologies brought:
We believe in the romance of technology, of industry. The eros of the train, the car, the electric light, the skyscraper. And the microchip, the neural network, the rocket, the split atom.
We believe in adventure. Undertaking the Hero’s Journey, rebelling against the status quo, mapping uncharted territory, conquering dragons, and bringing home the spoils for our community.
He exalted the man of action, who was willing to make progress while others were too hidebound or cowardly:
We believe in greatness. We admire the great technologists and industrialists who came before us, and we aspire to make them proud of us today.
We believe in ambition, aggression, persistence, relentlessness — strength.
And he disdained the ideas that would tie society to the past:
Our present society has been subjected to a mass demoralization campaign for six decades — against technology and against life — under varying names like “existential risk”, “sustainability”, “ESG”, “Sustainable Development Goals”, “social responsibility”, “stakeholder capitalism”, “Precautionary Principle”, “trust and safety”, “tech ethics”, “risk management”, “de-growth”, “the limits of growth”.
This demoralization campaign is based on bad ideas of the past — zombie ideas, many derived from Communism, disastrous then and now — that have refused to die.
Our enemy is stagnation.
Andreessen’s manifesto ditches the purple prose and artistic visions of Marinetti’s and replaces them with homages to “markets” and “the Techno-Capital Machine.” But his manifesto is a deliberate reimagining of Marinetti’s century-old ideas.
Since its publication, Andreessen’s text has come to represent [ https://substack.com/redirect/295dc716-e386-4ad0-b842-1c7b108b1c92?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] the feelings of an entire category of self-styled tech visionaries.
These people design the gadgets that dominate our attention, they harvest our data, and they control the social-media networks that shape our information diets. Many of them sat in the first row of the presidential inauguration and now enjoy great influence over the federal government. They now have political power to match their immense wealth and social influence.
So it’s worth seeing where the old version of Futurism led; it may help us understand where this newer model is taking us.
Futurism was, on its face, an artistic movement. Its adherents wanted to break free of the straitjackets of tradition and criticism and create something new. In the Manifesto of the Futurist Painters (Futurists loved to write manifestos), they declared [ https://substack.com/redirect/f9ec0336-c612-4891-bb1f-7c4b0dbc8adc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that
We want to fight implacably against the mindless, snobbish, and fanatical religion of the past, religion nurtured by the pernicious existence of the museums. We rebel against the spineless admiration for old canvases, old statues, and old objects, and against the enthusiasm for everything worm-eaten, grimy, or corroded by time; and we deem it unjust and criminal that people habitually disdain whatever is young, new, and trembling with life.
Futurists drew on the innovations of Cubism to create art that celebrated the constant movement and chaos of modern life. Umberto Boccioni painted “Dynamism of a Cyclist” in 1913:
While Joseph Stella tried to capture the electrified excitement at Coney Island:
And the industrial grandeur of the Brooklyn Bridge:
But their interests went well beyond art. The Futurists were what we might now call accelerationists — they wanted to bring the future into being as quickly as possible, breaking down any barriers that might prevent this from happening. The more quickly the new ways destabilized the old order, the better. They had an interest in technology and science, as we’ve seen, and they weren’t shy of a little bloodshed if it would help bring change. After all, point #9 of the Futurist Manifesto reads:
We will glorify war — the world’s only hygiene — militarism, patriotism, the destructive gesture of freedom-bringers, beautiful ideas worth dying for, and scorn for woman.
The Futurists had a chance to try their hand at war soon enough; many of them enlisted in the Italian Army to fight in World War I. The war killed several prominent members of the group, including Boccioni, and caused the movement to disband for a while.
As the war ended, Marinetti decided to push the movement toward politics. He formed the Futurist Political Party in 1918, combining socialist and nationalist ideas. It didn’t last long, because Marinetti merged his new party with another new political organization in 1919; the Fasci Italiani di Combattimento, or Italian Fascist Party, led by Benito Mussolini.
Not only were the Futurists attracted to fascism, but they lent the budding fascist movement some key techniques. As Anne Bowler [ https://substack.com/redirect/b605e8da-509e-4cbf-8ca8-2ef4f1b1db7a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] writes,
Futurism not only articulated a content similar to Fascist ideology — nationalism, militarism, the cult of irrational violence and aestheticization of violence — but developed important forms in their performances, notably agit-prop and the spectacle, that formed the basis of later Party methods for crowd provocation and control. But the formal contribution of Futurism goes further. As a political weapon, the manifesto is a form particularly suited to the incendiary dissemination of ideological platforms, and Futurism, though not the first group of artists to recognize its special utility, has nevertheless been credited with establishing its precedence among subsequent avant-movements.
Marinetti dreamed of a government of “technicians,” in which the wonders of new technology would be deployed to bring Italy to greatness. He found a hero in Benito Mussolini, who promised to make Italy a cutting-edge industrial power.
The movements didn’t mesh perfectly — Marinetti would storm out of the 1920 Fascist Congress and stay out of politics for a while before rejoining Mussolini’s cause — but the Futurists thought that the fascists were useful, and vice versa. Marinetti praised Mussolini’s rise to power in 1923 by saying [ https://substack.com/redirect/e0b148b2-4edc-41b1-a9eb-fa19fca405b0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that
the coming to power of Fascism constitutes the realization of the minimum Futurist programme launched (along with a maximum programme not yet achieved) fourteen years ago by a group of bold young men who opposed themselves with persuasive arguments against the whole nation which had been defiled by senility and a foreigner-fearing mediocrity. . . . Prophets and forerunners of the great Italy of Today, we Futurists are happy to salute in our not yet forty-year-old Prime Minister a marvelous Futurist temperament.
Our modern techno-futurists have allied themselves with Donald Trump’s hard-right movement in much the same way that the Italian Futurists embraced Mussolini. Rather than being enamored with cars and electricity, they want to clear the way for the glorious advances that artificial intelligence will bring. They believe [ https://substack.com/redirect/a9a2ac49-7cd3-442b-a3d4-fe9711c59a07?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that Trump will be useful in shattering the legal and social restraints that keep us from leaping into a brave new world.
Trump even invited one of the most reckless of the “technicians,” Elon Musk, into the White House, where he proceeded to unleash chaos with what Marinetti might have called “aggressive action, a feverish insomnia.” The idea was that he would apply the Silicon Valley “move fast and break things” ethos to the American government. He did, I guess.
Whether or not Donald Trump has ever heard of Filippo Marinetti, he seems to be acting out the goal Marinetti set for the Futurists: “We will destroy the museums, libraries, academies of every kind, will fight moralism, feminism, every opportunistic or utilitarian cowardice.”
Elon Musk puts it this way: [ https://substack.com/redirect/b6e7e7a3-29f1-4e60-b061-b9aa8b35aa4d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] the “West” suffers from “civilizational suicidal empathy;” in other words, our impulse to be kind to one another weakens us.
The group of techno-futurists that have gathered around Trump imagine themselves, as the Italian Futurists did, as bold men of action, hitching themselves to a movement that will destroy the old order to bring about a new technological age. In the end, Marinetti and his movement brought Italy fascism and ruin. What will this age’s futurists bring to the United States?
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
You can share the newsletter with others:
You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.95sByppcTaO6KvHGXRQHhroNl_Q1b67o11V-N-eIC8s?