View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/albert-robidas-electric-life

I like to think of myself as a sophisticated appreciator of culture, somebody who seeks intellectual stimulation and complexity. But, let’s be honest, sometimes I just want turn on a sci-fi movie so I can look at cool spaceships for 90 minutes, even if there’s barely a plot.
I feel, therefore, like Albert Robida was a man after my own heart. Robida was an illustrator in late 19th-century France who made a name for himself as a satirist and caricaturist. Much of his work was directed at events and people who have long since faded into obscurity, but, in the 1880s, his career took a turn. 
Robida found himself fascinated by the new literary genre that people eventually called merveilleux scientifique [ https://substack.com/redirect/f825ba97-4b3b-4464-bb41-2591c53b6dd8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. These books, inspired by the imagination (and success) of Jules Verne, were a sort of early science fiction, especially interested in exploring the consequences of new technology and scientific discovery. As an illustrator, Robida had the ability to bring futuristic visions to life.
If you want to receive posts like this every Sunday (and sometimes on Wednesdays), subscribe! If you value these deep dives into history, consider becoming a paying subscriber!
One of Robida’s earliest speculative stories imagines the battles of the future — it’s called La Guerre au vingtième siècle, or War in the 20th Century. The story, written in 1869 and published in 1883, imagines a 1945 world war in which the United States tries to invade Romania while China attacks Corsica. Its main character is a guy named Fabius Molinas whose story, like so many sci-fi protagonists, is really just an excuse to take the reader on a tour of the future. And to see some cool ships. The title page advertises what’s to come:
Molinas finds himself in the midst of a battle between airships:
The airships find themselves under attack from ground artillery:
I really like this vertiginous image of an airship hovering over a city; it reflects the fascination that people would have felt with being airborne in an age when almost no one would have experienced it:
Immense cannons dwarfed their human operators:
But explosives are not the only way to kill people in Robida’s 20th century. He also anticipated chemical and biological warfare, which soldiers would survive using elegant diving helmets:
Robida’s scenes often combined two of the more impressive and fearsome industries of the late 19th century, guns and chemistry:
Robida engineers the plot to put his protagonist in a submarine:
The naval battles feature hand-to-hand combat, which is pretty cool:
There’s an incident in which Molinas’ airship is brought down by African animals: 
Our hero finally ends up in Mexico, where he meets a pretty lady named Dolores, learns the war is over, and heads back to France with his new bride in tow.
Is it great literature? Nope. Does it make sense? Not really. Does it look awesome? You bet. 
And beyond the great illustrations, Robida made some pretty good predictions. He envisioned a world at war in the 1940s, armies fighting each other in the air and under the sea, the use of chemistry to create new deadly weapons, and mobile cannons that seemed like tanks. It all seems rather prescient.
For his next trick, Robida took on all aspects of life in the 20th century in, well, Le Vingtième siècle. La vie électrique (The Twentieth Century. The Electric Life).
This one’s set in 1953. It has a little bit more of a plot, but not much more. An inventor named Philox Lorris is disappointed in his son Georges, who is more interested in the arts than science. Philox tries to arrange for Georges to marry a woman with scientific accomplishments, like “doctoresse Sophie Bardoz.” But a freak electrical storm puts Georges in touch with a beautiful young woman named Estelle over the telephonoscope (a kind of videophone/TV):
Georges falls for Estelle, much to his father’s dismay. So Philox decides to send Georges on an engagement trip that doubles as a tour of the great scientific and industrial sites of Europe. This surely will attract Georges to the sciences!
Shenanigans ensue, and there’s no real point in getting into them. Again, the interesting parts of the book are the futuristic scenes that greet our travelers as they travel. We see the Sahara made fertile again through climate manipulation (and some modern improvements to the pyramids):
A system of pneumatic tubes through which people can travel at high speeds:
“Aircabs” that allow people to travel from balcony to balcony (I like the ship’s wheel they use to steer it):
And immense, forbidding chemical factories:
Robida’s version of the 1950s had seen exciting medical innovations, including this incubator for the overworked character Sulfatin:
There were layer-cake floating fortresses:
And military maneuvers on bicycle:
Cities were impossibly busy, bustling in three dimensions:
But the “electric life” overstimulated people’s brains, making them physically weak and overexcited (there’s some unfortunate stuff in here about the abilities of various races and the need for “crossbreeding”). 
Biological warfare was suggested as a way to weed out the weak.
In the end, Robida ties up all of his plots in a nice bow. Philox succeeds in demonstrating the efficacy of a new medicine that he has invented and is appointed Minister of Public Health. Everybody who had developed a love interest over the course of the story gets married, including Georges and Estelle. They retreat from the electric life by heading to the countryside, away from the madness of modern life:
There’s less of a story in Robida’s fiction than there is a vision of the future. And, as with most good science fiction, the real subject is France of the 1800s, not the world of the 1950s. 
Robida got a surprising amount right about the future, though his timing may have been off — video communication, world war, chemical and biological warfare, the rise of technologists in the social hierarchy, and the empowerment of women. I wish he’d been right about the pneumatic transportation tubes and the aerocabs; those look cool. 
Robida was absolutely correct about the role of electricity in the future world, as well as the way electric-powered devices would come to dominate life. He worried that all of this “progress” would pollute the air and the water. And, though he didn’t predict that everyone would be carrying around an addiction machine in their pockets, he understood that the “electric life” would change not just our physical world but our mental one, too — and not necessarily for the better. 
Robida went on to refine his vision of the future in other, later books, although most of his vision shows up in these two early works. I’ll leave you with his 1902 print of people going to the opera in the year 2000. It looks a lot more fun than the real year 2000 was:
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are three ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
You can share the newsletter with others:
You can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93b3JsZGhpc3Rvcnkuc3Vic3RhY2suY29tL2FjdGlvbi9kaXNhYmxlX2VtYWlsP3Rva2VuPWV5SjFjMlZ5WDJsa0lqb3hORFUyTXpNeE9Td2ljRzl6ZEY5cFpDSTZNVFkwTURneE1qSTFMQ0pwWVhRaU9qRTNOVFF5TWpZek5ESXNJbVY0Y0NJNk1UYzROVGMyTWpNME1pd2lhWE56SWpvaWNIVmlMVEk1TlRjeU5TSXNJbk4xWWlJNkltUnBjMkZpYkdWZlpXMWhhV3dpZlEubDQwcWE2c04ybHkzSFMtZldJZjhsOFBKZ3RhNW1GTFh4QjlxclpZMFdQQSIsInAiOjE2NDA4MTIyNSwicyI6Mjk1NzI1LCJmIjp0cnVlLCJ1IjoxNDU2MzMxOSwiaWF0IjoxNzU0MjI2MzQyLCJleHAiOjIwNjk4MDIzNDIsImlzcyI6InB1Yi0wIiwic3ViIjoibGluay1yZWRpcmVjdCJ9.CW0Sqz1nhZvddozKDGfTGFiyr3AVNkCb8a3OGl7HgNM?