View this post on the web at https://www.forkingpaths.co/p/should-the-enhanced-games-exist

I: Doping by Design
In 2024, a Greek swimmer named Kristian Gkolomeev sliced through the water in the Paris Olympics 50 meter freestyle. It was his fourth Olympics, and while he had performed near the top in each contest, he had always missed out on the medals. This time could be different.
The swimmers dove, the crowd roared, and chaotic, precision splashing ensued for just over 20 seconds. Gkolomeev surfaced, tore off his goggles, and checked the screens: he had finished fifth, missing a bronze medal by 0.03 seconds.
It was the same finishing place as his previous Olympics in 2020.
In his early 30s, with a young kid at home, Gkolomeev took stock of his future—and his past. Could he bring himself to again sacrifice everything, training constantly for four years, hoping for another elusive shot at Olympic glory? He also faced up to an uncomfortable truth: over a 14 year professional career near the top of his sport, his total earnings from swimming amounted to roughly $200,000—the equivalent of $14,000 per year. He would have made more working at McDonald’s.
There were also the nagging doubts: were his competitors playing fair? Dozens of swimmers had recently tested positive for banned substances, with a burgeoning scandal engulfing Chinese swimming [ https://substack.com/redirect/28f08918-2c09-4dc0-a081-a9122bf46a47?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. An anonymous survey of elite athletes [ https://substack.com/redirect/525dfc66-584c-4932-9610-450f3e062fd4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] found that one in five admitted to doping before the 2022 Commonwealth Games, though only a tiny proportion are detected by anti-doping testing. Could that 0.03 seconds that kept Gkolomeev off the Olympic podium be explained by drugs rather than superior training or genetics?
The answer of what to do next came to Gkolomeev while listening to a podcast [ https://substack.com/redirect/f06b6097-e6bf-42e4-a3aa-7b1470e07f95?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. There was a new venture called the Enhanced Games, which promised a fully level playing field. The idea was simple: rather than trying to police athletes into following a set of somewhat arbitrary anti-doping rules, athletes would instead test the limits of human possibility by openly taking performance-enhancing drugs.
But the real enticement was financial: athletes who could break a world record would be paid $1 million, five times more than Gkolomeev had made over a decade and a half of grit and sacrifice.
In February 2025, away from the fanfare and crowds, Gkolomeev completed the 50 meter freestyle in 20.89 seconds, 0.02 seconds faster than the previous world record, set in 2009. Aided by doping, the achievement will never be registered in the official record books. But Gkolomeev’s bank account certainly hit a new record.
In a few weeks, the inaugural Enhanced Games are slated to begin in Las Vegas. It’s a pilot project, featuring 50 athletes competing across three sporting domains: swimming, weightlifting, and track and field. Could someone become the first human to run 100 meters faster than Usain Bolt, albeit with steroids coursing through their body?
This controversial experiment cuts to the core of the philosophy of sport. The Games are financially backed by villainous caricatures Peter Thiel and Donald Trump Jr., who hope to earn money from the games by hawking performance-enhancing supplements to legions of aging weekend warriors. They champion the same ethos as the messianic tech bros who see themselves as unlocking a secret new phase of humanity, one that’s even more alluring if it’s limited exclusively to the rich and powerful.
Global sporting authorities have condemned the Enhanced Games and have closed ranks to destroy it. Any athletes who partake in the competition will face permanent bans from professional sports. (Gkolomeev may have swam faster than any human before him, but he’ll now never win an Olympic medal.)
To its critics, the Enhanced Games are a grotesquely unethical abomination that makes a mockery of the integrity, fair play, and human ingenuity that make sports worth watching. Who would want to watch the Tour de France if everyone was Lance Armstrong?
Others argue it’s exploitative late-stage capitalism at its worst, turning elite athletes starved for cash into freakish guinea pigs, with unknown long-term health effects. Would Gkolomeev have signed up if he had made a decent living from “clean” competition in the first place?
But proponents of the Enhanced Games push back hard, arguing it’ll be a great experiment into the limits of our species. Plus, they insist, sport is about testing people on a level playing field. It doesn’t matter if a runner wears super shoes, they argue, so long as anyone in the field can wear the same ones. Rather than having “clean” athletes compete against some who dope and get away with it, why not just make sure that everyone has the same set of advantages? 
And anyway, they say, aren’t the regulations arbitrary? Why are caffeine and creatine allowed by doping agencies but other substances are banned? And who’s really being exploited: the guy who earned $14,000 a year with zero recognition or the same man now being billed as a superhuman trailblazer with a million bucks?
Then there are those—beyond the Musk fanboys, the crypto bros, and the meme edgelords on X—who see the Enhanced Games as a worthy frontier in medical research. Perhaps the experimental approach with top athletes can yield advances that may later be deployed to help cancer patients rebuild muscle or gain aerobic endurance, prolonging their quality years of life. Could the Enhanced Games provide human prototypes for public health breakthroughs?
After all, there are several examples in which illicit sports doping generated fresh interventions, invented more individualized biomarker tracking, and accelerated health research in ways that spilled over into standard health care. What if that process could be brought from the shadows into the light? 
Many public health experts are less optimistic and more worried. What if someone dies? The risks lie not just in competition. What if teenagers start freelancing their own biohacking cocktails inspired by a fresh spate of artificially muscled athletes they idolize? What if more people start buying unknown peptides of dubious quality off the internet, mixing and matching beyond the oversight of medical guidance? What if the mythic quest for endless longevity means a surge in avoidable deaths?
This, then, is the real showdown in Vegas later this month, a philosophical joust over which rules we should play by when deciding what makes us human:
Should the Enhanced Games exist?...

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.xJqG_b5YmSN6w4mnPCdMYnWIrpIV0KceW8-p9SaCujc?