View this post on the web at https://www.overcomingbias.com/p/who-are-you-descendants

On AI risk, I’ve said [ https://substack.com/redirect/30dfe6c3-f50c-43e5-9fd9-80608418c406?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that evolved things have two robust habits: wariness of co-existing rivals, even when quite similar to you, and indulgence of descendants, even when quite different from you. Today, future AIs are our descendants, not rivals.
Some reply that this is a crazy stupid metaphorical application of the of “descendant” concept, as AIs are not from the Homo Sapiens species, and they have no DNA. So AIs are not “real” descendants.
But the concept of “descendant” is a technical term in the general theory of Darwinian selection. I’m using this concept literally, not metaphorically. DNA-based evolution is a special case of this general theory, and for many hundreds of thousands of years human evolution has been driven mostly by a different, non-DNA, kind of Darwinian selection: cultural evolution.
The general Darwinian theory is that a tendency of things to cause similar future things with a similar tendency is selected for. When such selection is possible, it happens, and such things tend to spread everywhere possible. Those selected similar future things are “descendants”.
This process selects in part for things that persist over time, as the future version of a thing is in fact a similar future thing. And it selects for a thing changing other things with similar tendencies to be more similar to this thing. But most important, it selects for the creation of more new similar things with similar tendencies. So when humans influence other humans to have similar behaviors, without influencing their DNA, these others count as cultural evolution descendants.
How about if you kick pebbles in some direction, which then hit other pebbles, knocking them in similar directions? Yes, those are technically also “descendants”. They just aren’t very interesting ones, as usually friction drains away the total momentum of these moving pebbles, so that they all soon stop, ending this lineage. Somewhat like infertile “mules” who arise for mating horses and donkeys.
Yes, if you trigger an avalanche, that cascade of “pebbles” will go on longer, but it will also stop pretty soon. If you trigger a nuclear bomb, the cascade can go further, but even so that lineage will soon end. Lineages that can continue indefinitely are much more interesting.
How about if you make a computer virus, that tries to spread and copy itself in the wild? This is also a descendant lineage, but pretty sure to end soon. However, if you gave it the ability to make changes to the copies it spreads, that has more potential to create a longer lineage. Making those more interesting descendants.
Writing a novel is making a thing that has similarities to you. And if you let other people read it, that might influence authors to write similar novels. Making both those other authors, and your and their novels, your “descendants”. Though yes, novels seem far more dependent on humans for their reproduction than vice versa.
Descendants who seem more likely to reproduce and spread further in a wider range of scenarios are more interesting. And advanced AIs seem likely to be that sort of extra interesting descendants.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.4YqSM7UxILP_k_xodz8TRZr-yj4J53x1Cvj9TTmuZc0?