View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/how-france-tried-to-replace-god

Thanks for reading! This week, as part of our series on the art and material culture of the French Revolution, we’re continuing our investigation of the changing role of religion in revolutionary France.
I think you should subscribe to this newsletter if you don’t already. And if you think that learning along with me is worth a few bucks a month, you should become a paid subscriber:
You get the sense that Discalced Carmelite nuns don’t mess around. A Catholic order formed by Teresa of Ávila and John of the Cross (who were later sainted by the Catholic Church), they seal themselves into small cloistered monasteries and live lives of quiet prayer. They’re sworn to simple poverty (“discalced” means “without shoes”).
When the revolutionary government in France ordered all convents closed in 1792, you can imagine what a shock it must have been to the Carmelite nuns of Compiègne. They were abruptly pushed out of the only life many of them had ever really known into a society in tumult, where the church that had guided everything about their lives was under extreme scrutiny. 
The nuns of Compiègne decided not to abandon their vows as the new government had ordered them to. They no longer wore their habits, as that was illegal, but they continued to live together in communal apartments and keep up their ritual of quiet prayer. 
The group’s prioress, Mother Teresa, told the group to prepare to sacrifice their lives for the church. The twenty nuns lived like this for more than a year, but by 1794, an increasingly radical government had decided that loyalty to the old ways of the church was tantamount to sedition. Agents looked to snuff out any last remnants of traditional practice. They raided the nuns’ quarters and arrested them. Mother Teresa’s prediction would come true. 
The nuns were sent to the same prison as Marie Antoinette. Their apartments were searched for evidence that they held counterrevolutionary beliefs. Armed with letters in which the women praised the monarchy and expressed doubts about the revolution, prosecutors put them on trial [ https://substack.com/redirect/702e7413-efac-4479-a90d-8aef361fd152?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. The nuns represented themselves, at one point pressing the prosecutor to define what, exactly, he meant by “fanaticism,” one of the charges against them. In the end, he admitted that what he called fanaticism was the religious belief that almost everyone in France had shared just a few years before. 
The trial, like so many in the Terror, was a foregone conclusion. The nuns were sentenced to death. They sang hymns in the cart that took them to the guillotine and reaffirmed their vows as they stood on the scaffold. One by one, they were decapitated. The scene became a famous one in Catholic iconography, here represented in a Catalan church:
The killing of 20 nuns was a bit much even for revolutionary Paris. The event came to represent [ https://substack.com/redirect/702e7413-efac-4479-a90d-8aef361fd152?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] the excesses of the Terror at its most violent. Some say that the event helped to tip the scales against Robespierre, who faced the guillotine only 10 days later. 
If a French person had entered a coma in 1788 and awakened in 1794, he would have been flabbergasted by the shift in the way his countrymen understood religion. Sure, people had questioned the Catholic Church sometimes, seeing it as corrupt or hypocritical, but executing nuns for the crime of being nuns? That would have shocked almost anybody. But what happened to the shoeless nuns of Compiègne was just one aspect of the religious whiplash that France experienced in the 1790s.
The year before the nuns were arrested and killed, there was an uprising in the Vendée, an area in western France. The people there supported the traditional arrangements in France: they wanted the restoration of the king and the church to their previous positions of supremacy. 
The uprising turned into an outright civil war. Vendeans formed a “Catholic Army,” a ragtag outfit that took on the republican forces. Their symbol was a sacred heart, and their slogan was “God, the king.”
The makeshift Catholic Army fought hard but was no match for the regular troops. Officials arrested anyone suspected of royalist tendencies. Being a priest or a nun was enough to seal your fate. 
The government arrested so many people in the Vendée that it became inefficient to guillotine them. Instead, leaders started to load dozens of prisoners at a time onto special barges on the Loire River in Nantes. The barges would be floated out into the middle of the water, sunk, and then floated again once everyone had drowned. 
The mass drownings killed thousands of people, a disproportionate number of whom were members of the first estate. 
But even the most die-hard atheists in the revolutionary government understood that it wasn’t enough to kill all the priests and nuns who refused to swear an oath to the new regime. They needed something to replace religion in people’s lives. 
As revolutionary leaders drowned nuns in the Loire, they held a Festival of Reason at the Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris. Women dressed like Roman goddesses and people celebrated “philosophy,” that sort of thing: 
Nevertheless, it did allow people to gather in worship of something:
For the next few months, the government attacked religion itself, attempting to dechristianize France and replace it with something much colder: respect for logic. 
Then, at the height of the anti-religious frenzy, Maximilien Robespierre, leader of the radical faction, reversed course. Rather than attacking the very idea of belief in God, he tried a compromise, endorsing a Cult of the Supreme Being. This would allow French people to worship a divine force, find a reason for moral order, and reconcile with the inevitability of death without all that illogical old-man-in-the-sky, Jesus-walking-on-water stuff. 
This idea has been floating around for a while. A 1791 illustration made an attempt to relate all Western religious and philosophical thought to the vague idea of the Supreme Being. The diagram combines the solar system, 
Christian religious beliefs, 
and reverence for philosophers, politicians, and scientists 
into one geometrically appealing scheme: 
The Supreme Being was generally represented as an abstract force:
And there were plans for a grand neoclassical temple to the Supreme Being:
The Terror came to an end in the summer of 1794, and the height of anti-religious fervor ended with it. Religious freedom was partially restored the next winter, partially as a way to get the Vendean rebels to agree to peace. But the religious innovation didn’t come to an end. 
Intellectuals continued to look for a way to reconcile the Enlightenment values of the revolution with their desire to practice something like a religion. They eventually settled on something called Theophilanthropy, which tried to strip all of the “superstitions” out of Catholic belief. 
Theophilanthropists worshipped a Supreme Being and carried out rituals like baptism, but focused more on utilitarian ethics than Bible stories. They held their rites in churches with garlands and fruits on the altar instead of a crucifix. 
Not everybody was on board with theophilanthropy. Many moderates found it ridiculous, and James Gillray [ https://substack.com/redirect/aad199ea-a535-460b-90e7-393c8045f4ff?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] mocked it in a typically busy cartoon:
The rise and fall of theophilanthropy were quick. By 1803, Napoleon had banned the practice. He had other uses for religion. Napoleon restored the Catholic Church in France in 1801, signing a Concordat with the Pope that ended persecution of the church in exchange for the state keeping the church property it had confiscated and Napoleon getting to appoint bishops going forward. He purged [ https://substack.com/redirect/53d113f6-c355-4ec2-8b7d-1c5fbfa590fd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] the clerical hierarchy when bishops disapproved of his divorce and had church officials find a third-century “Saint Napoleon” so he could have his own feast day. 
By 1806, the Napoleonic church had issued a new catechism [ https://substack.com/redirect/9a8f907a-3275-45c4-bcfc-fe5af62c3470?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]:
Question: What are the duties of Christians toward those who govern them, and what in particular are our duties towards Napoleon I, our emperor?
Answer: Christians owe to the princes who govern them, and we in particular owe to Napoleon I, our emperor, love, respect, obedience, fidelity, military service, and the taxes levied for the preservation and defense of the empire and of his throne. We also owe him fervent prayers for his safety and for the spiritual and temporal prosperity of the state.
Question: Why are we subject to all these duties toward our emperor?
Answer: First, because God, who has created empires and distributes them according to his will, has, by loading our emperor with gifts both in peace and in war, established him as our sovereign and made him the agent of his power and his image upon earth. To honor and serve our emperor is therefore to honor and serve God himself. Secondly, because our Lord Jesus Christ himself, both by his teaching and his example, has taught us what we owe to our sovereign. Even at his very birth he obeyed the edict of Caesar Augustus; he paid the established tax; and while he commanded us to render to God those things which belong to God, he also commanded us to render unto Caesar those things which are Caesar’s.
Question: Are there not special motives which should attach us more closely to Napoleon I, our emperor?
Answer: Yes, for it is he whom God has raised up in trying times to re-establish the public worship of the holy religion of our fathers and to be its protector; he has re-established and preserved public order by his profound and active wisdom; he defends the state by his mighty arm; he has become the anointed of the Lord by the consecration which he has received from the sovereign pontiff, head of the Church universal.
In the end, Napoleon restored the church to France, but only to ensure people’s obedience to a new supreme being: himself.
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.TzlcMO0hzsd74v7Bb79vBB9xieufMLWroxfvVbJVX6Q?