View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/the-life-and-death-of-marat

We’re turning our attention to the art and material culture of French Revolution for the next few weeks. First up — a very famous painting of a poorly understood man!
Let’s get the part you know out of the way. John-Paul Marat was stabbed in the bathtub, and Jacques-Louis David painted this picture of the dead revolutionary:
If you’re like me, you saw this painting in a high school textbook when you were learning about the French Revolution and understood that it was an Important Historical Artifact — one of those paintings that everybody has seen — but didn’t really understand why. 
I mean, the image is arresting. It’s not every day that somebody gets stabbed in the bathtub, and David’s painting is notable for the way in which it presents a secular hero as if he were a martyred Christian saint. 
But Marat deserves more than a glance, because he was more than the victim of an unusual death and the subject of a famous painting. 
One of the things that always floors me about the French Revolution was how young these guys were. Danton and Desmoulins were just 34 when the Reign of Terror came for them. Robespierre was only 36 when his turn in the guillotine came. These three were elders compared to the 26-year-old Saint-Just, the radical “Angel of Death” who persecuted them and later found himself under the executioner’s blade. 
Marat, however, was older. He was not an old man (he was killed at age 50, in 1793, about a year before the others), but not a wild-eyed young radical either. The younger generation looked up to him as someone with valuable life experience, a man who had been advocating for change since they were children. 
Marat had spent significant time outside of France — he grew up in Switzerland (his surname at birth had been Mara) and had lived in England as an adult — and he had enjoyed a long and substantial career as a doctor before the revolution. 
Moreover, Marat was a true man of the Enlightenment. In his younger days, he had published essays that waded into the philosophical disputes of the time; he clashed with Voltaire and found inspiration in Rousseau’s ideas. He performed experiments on the nature of fire, the behavior of light, and electricity. These didn’t all go over well — he seems to have attracted the ire of many of France’s most prominent scientists. 
Subscribe to receive these posts in your email. Paying subscribers make this work possible! If you enjoy this newsletter, consider contributing.
Perhaps this was because Marat was, as we might put it today, a lot. He was a short, unusual-looking man. He was fiercely moralistic, perhaps even self-righteous. He wrote [ https://substack.com/redirect/a0c50931-4aea-4ebb-adcb-31eddfe59944?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that 
I had already developed a sense of morality by the time I was eight years old. At that age, I couldn’t bear to see other people treated badly; the sight of cruelty filled me with anger and witnessing an injustice made my heart race as if I myself were the victim.
Marat had a tendency toward black-and-white thinking. He was aggressive and direct, verging on rude, when he disagreed with someone. His moral code was total, which meant that he had a hard time seeing things any other way but his own. His newspaper, The People’s Friend, took no prisoners, but he always seemed to escape punishment for his inflammatory views. 
As the revolution began, he went after pre-revolutionary Finance Minister Jacques Necker in a 69-page manifesto. He called [ https://substack.com/redirect/a0c50931-4aea-4ebb-adcb-31eddfe59944?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] Necker
the most adroit and dangerous prop of arbitrary power, the cruelest adversary of freedom, the solidest support of the aristocracy…. [his] heart is with the capitalists, the bankers, the speculators. He is their God and they are his apostles.
Later, he daydreamed about the death of the moderate Marquis de Lafayette:
If only the People’s Friend could rally two thousand determined men, he would lead them to rip Lafayette’s heart out, burn down the royal palace with the King and his ministers inside, and impale the National Assembly deputies in their seats.
He saw widespread violence [ https://substack.com/redirect/a4f10eb2-1d84-4792-85d0-af4a865b1d6c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] as the only solution to some problems. In fact, he seemed to revel in the possibility:
The cutting off of five or six hundred heads would have guaranteed you peace, liberty and happiness.
A mistaken humanity has crippled your arms and held back your blows; it will cost the lives of millions of your brothers. The soldiers of the National Guard shall escape death no more than the others! The French guards whom I have just mentioned, and all the soldiers who are deserting the King’s flags and gathering under those of the nation, will be sacrificed first of all, in spite of all the pacifying sermons which the General is delivering to them. Your enemies need only to triumph for a moment, and blood will flow in torrents. They will murder you without compassion, they will rip open the bellies of your wives, and in order to choke within you the love of liberty, their bloody hands will explore the entrails of your children to find their hearts.
In life, he was portrayed — by his supporters at least — as inspired and bold:
As the revolution intensified, Marat waded into the complex struggles between the radical and moderate wings of the National Convention. He sided, of course, with the radicals. His rhetoric was so inflammatory that the moderate Girondins put him on trial in 1793. 
He won; it seemed like Marat always seemed to avoid consequences for his bold and inflammatory actions. Not only did he avoid punishment, his supporters treated him like a folk hero:
In this drawing, Diogenes — the Greek philosopher who searched for the one honest man — helps to pull Marat into the light after his acquittal:
Soon after, the Girondins would fall from power. But Marat would not enjoy this victory for very long. The radicals who had celebrated him soon started to ignore him, and he was in the bathtub too often to force himself into the political scene. 
Ah, yes, the bathtub. As he got older, Marat spent all of his time there. It wasn’t because he wanted a life of leisure; on the contrary, Marat was tortured by a chronic, spreading skin condition [ https://substack.com/redirect/181d3a93-2a40-4dfc-858f-2bce7491056f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. It must have especially frustrated him as a physician that he could not figure out how to stop his discomfort. 
What was wrong with Marat? At age 45, he started to experience devilishly itchy skin lesions on his genitals. Over time, they spread to much of the rest of his body. He itched and ached all the time. Marat’s opponents gleefully suggested that he suffered from syphilis [ https://substack.com/redirect/9a81d543-a61c-42bf-a82d-97c6d6a4ea05?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] or leprosy (this seems unlikely). He thought that the problem came from his days of hiding in the sewers from the authorities. Modern analyses [ https://substack.com/redirect/181d3a93-2a40-4dfc-858f-2bce7491056f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] have speculated that his problem was diabetes, eczema, or a rare inflammatory condition called Behçet’s disease. 
Whatever it was, he confined himself more and more to the bath, because that was the only place where the torment stopped. He soaked all day, his head wrapped in a vinegar-soaked cloth. This kept him away from the center of the revolutionary effort, and his influence waned.
The bathtub is also where Charlotte Corday found him. Corday was a supporter of the Girondins, the moderates whom Marat had worked to weaken, the ones who had put him on trial and failed to convict him. She thought Marat was the force behind the September Massacres, in which mobs of radical revolutionaries had dragged prisoners into the streets and murdered them (Marat’s writings had certainly set the stage for such violence, but it does not seem as if he helped to plan the violence). She determined to kill him, believing that his death would save many thousands of lives.
Corday dreamed of murdering Marat in front of the entire Convention, but she soon learned that he rarely left the bath. So she showed up at his door and claimed to have evidence of a Girondist plot. Marat let her in, and she plunged a knife into his chest. In his painting, David depicts Marat holding Corday’s petition:
The French national library does have this copy of The People’s Friend, stained with the blood of its editor:
David’s version of this moment is the iconic one, but many, many artists depicted this shocking event. Some were relatively matter-of-fact:
Some tragic:
And some satirical:
Years later, even Edvard Munch took liberties with the idea:
Charlotte Corday was, like so many, guillotined. At least her execution was connected to a real crime, not a political one. 
As happens so often, people liked Marat better after he was dead. He was no longer an annoying, combative, rigid figure prone to paranoia. He was now a pure martyr of the revolution. David chose to idealize him in his famous painting, showing Marat with soft, pale skin free of the scabs and lesions that he dealt with in real life. The radicals embalmed his heart separately from the rest of his body and essentially built a shrine to his memory. They briefly changed the name of the city of Le Havre to Le Havre-Marat. His tomb became a sacred site:
But then the radicals whom Marat had helped to bring to power turned on each other and fell from power. The revolution stumbled and foundered, eventually becoming something Marat would not have recognized. As the radical values that he championed faded away, so did knowledge of Marat himself. He became a vague symbol of the excesses of the revolution, or, for many of us, the guy who died in his bathtub in that one painting. 
But Marat had been much more than that — a strange, insistent force, convinced of his own righteousness, who dragged his country toward his own moral principles by sheer force of will. Perhaps it was lucky that he died before he could see that his ideas would end in disaster.
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment:
Thanks for reading!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.YQCTO07efvWHlBobLRFIz61CwfL7EmzuGeJSrTWpHe8?