View this post on the web at https://thezvi.substack.com/p/on-the-adolescence-of-technology

Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei is back with another extended essay, The Adolescence of Technology [ https://substack.com/redirect/971a1cc6-742c-45d7-8e7b-fa58eb4040f9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
This is the follow up to his previous essay Machines of Loving Grace [ https://substack.com/redirect/a61a5183-8762-481a-a7d7-8dd321d50dbf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. In MoLG, Dario talked about some of the upsides of AI. Here he talks about the dangers, and the need to minimize them while maximizing the benefits.  
In many aspects this was a good essay. Overall it is a mild positive update on Anthropic. It was entirely consistent with his previous statements and work. 
I believe the target is someone familiar with the basics, but who hasn’t thought that much about any of this and is willing to listen given the source. For that audience [ https://substack.com/redirect/6ec2c4ff-aac6-43a5-a8be-e208819c54e2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], there are a lot of good bits. For the rest of us, it was good to affirm his positions. 
That doesn’t mean there aren’t major problems, especially with its treatment of those more worried, and its failure to present stronger calls to action.
He is at his weakest when he is criticising those more worried than he is. In some cases the description of those positions is on the level of a clear strawman [ https://substack.com/redirect/8066b077-1e15-4ca7-bb13-796147da1abf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. The central message is, ‘yes this might kill everyone and we should take that seriously and it will be a tough road ahead, but careful not to take it too seriously or speak that too plainly, or call for doing things that would be too costly.’
One can very much appreciate him stating his views, and his effort to alter people to the risks involved, while also being sad about these major problems. 
While I agree with Dario about export controls, I do not believe an aggressively adversarial framing of the situation is conducive to good outcomes. 
In the end when he essentially affirms his commitment to racing and rules out trying to do all that much, saying flat out that others will go ahead regardless, so I broadly agree with Oliver Habryka and Daniel Kokotajlo here [ https://substack.com/redirect/0b0473ba-5ebc-4e20-b2f4-a7edf077fe0b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], and also with Ryan Greenblatt [ https://substack.com/redirect/9ebde3ae-6501-454b-8a51-ed633c9b8d7e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. This is true even though Anthropic’s commitment to racing to superintelligence (here ‘powerful AI’) should already be ‘priced in’ to your views on them.
Here is a 3 million views strong ‘tech Twitter slop’ summary of the essay [ https://substack.com/redirect/b66cf0a3-28f9-461c-bf42-3961ad7ec899?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], linked because it is illustrative of how such types read and pull from the essay, including how it centrally attempts to position Dario as the reasonable one between two extremes.
Table of Contents
Blame The Imperfect. [ https://substack.com/redirect/d1cde145-18ba-4609-a566-070f1ca091a0?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Anthropic’s Term Is ‘Powerful AI’. [ https://substack.com/redirect/091a5d3e-4550-4100-8abb-81c80cdf44e9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Dario Doubles Down on Dates of Dazzling Datacenter Daemons. [ https://substack.com/redirect/c9e4b515-c890-47b0-a862-ffc43733f4aa?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
How You Gonna Keep Em Down On The Server Farm. [ https://substack.com/redirect/3106e2a7-b520-4da3-862c-61fe5859520a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
If He Wanted To, He Would Have. [ https://substack.com/redirect/11c0a570-830d-4abe-a498-d3b433bb86d4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
So Will He Want To? [ https://substack.com/redirect/4f52ceb9-4a92-4d14-9976-e297bdfdad91?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
The Balance of Power. [ https://substack.com/redirect/f6ac331f-4729-4a15-874f-2eaf89af2355?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Defenses of Autonomy. [ https://substack.com/redirect/fbabd1a3-2f82-4e9e-ad48-37df9bf3937a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Weapon of Mass Destruction. [ https://substack.com/redirect/4ff95fff-1fb0-4b6d-ae2b-79d5c75dd4e2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Defenses Against Biological Attacks. [ https://substack.com/redirect/d467baab-f0c1-46ab-8d5b-cde19ea3d1e1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
One Model To Rule Them All. [ https://substack.com/redirect/3182d712-4754-4044-857e-e70140982634?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Defenses Against Autocracy. [ https://substack.com/redirect/de522573-57a5-4cc4-941c-77346072c757?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
They Took Our Jobs. [ https://substack.com/redirect/34be9668-c5d5-423e-9e24-436b28b39973?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Don’t Let Them Take Our Jobs. [ https://substack.com/redirect/401edf9e-7a0e-4e1f-aef0-0cf766f86cc3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Economic Concentrations of Power. [ https://substack.com/redirect/2e2822eb-78a5-490b-ac96-f19c3341e80a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Unknown Unknowns. [ https://substack.com/redirect/312b010e-7396-4bbf-a093-49f055b12249?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Oh Well Back To Racing. [ https://substack.com/redirect/c935b041-a80b-48d2-9ec9-c7953786d61c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]
Blame The Imperfect 
Right up front we get the classic tensions we get from Dario Amodei and Anthropic. He’s trying to be helpful, but also narrowing the window of potential actions and striking down anyone who speaks too plainly or says things that might seem too weird.
It’s an attempt to look like a sensible middle ground that everyone can agree upon, but it’s an asymmetric bothsidesism in a situation that is very clearly asymmetric the other way, and I’m pretty sick of it. 
As with talking about the benefits, I think it is important to discuss risks in a careful and well-considered manner. In particular, I think it is critical to:
Avoid doomerism. Here, I mean “doomerism” not just in the sense of believing doom is inevitable (which is both a false and self-fulfilling belief), but more generally, thinking about AI risks in a quasi-religious way. … These voices used off-putting language reminiscent of religion or science fiction, and called for extreme actions without having the evidence that would justify them.
His full explanation on ‘doomerism,’ here clearly used as a slur or at minimum an ad hominem attack, basically blames the ‘backlash’ against efforts to not die on people being too pessimistic, or being ‘quasi-religious’ or sounding like ‘science fiction,’ or sounding ‘sensationalistic.’ 
‘Quasi-religious’ is also being used as an ad hominem or associative attack [ https://substack.com/redirect/1f15b43f-2668-4b2e-8898-558744c57ce1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] to try and dismiss and lower the status of anyone who is too much more concerned than he is, and to distance himself from similar attacks made by others.
I can’t let that slide. This is a dumb, no good, unhelpful and false narrative. Also see Ryan Greenblatt’s extended explanation for why these labels and dismissals are not okay [ https://substack.com/redirect/9ebde3ae-6501-454b-8a51-ed633c9b8d7e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. He is also right that the post does not engage with the actual arguments here, and that the vibes in several other ways downplay the central stakes and dangers while calling them ‘autonomy risks’ and that the essay is myopic in only dealing with modest capability gains (e.g. to the ‘geniuses in a datacenter’ level but then he implicitly claims advancements mostly stop, which they very much wouldn’t.)
The ‘backlash’ against those trying to not die was primarily due to a coordinated effort by power and economic interests, who engage in far worse sensationalism and ‘quasi-religious’ talk constantly, and also from the passage of time and people’s acting as if not having died yet meant it was all overblown, as happens with many that warn of potential dangers, including things like nuclear war. 
You know what’s the most ‘quasi-religious’ such statement I’ve seen recently, except without the quasi? Marc Andreessen, deliberate bad faith architect of much of this backlash, calling AI the ‘Philosopher’s Stone [ https://substack.com/redirect/18c776e8-a0a6-440a-8015-412e39134fbb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].’ I mean, okay, Newton.  
What causes people call logical arguments that talk plainly about likely physical consequences ‘reminiscent of science fiction’ or of ‘religion’ as an attack, they’re at best engaging in low-level pattern matching. Of course the future is going to ‘sound like science fiction’ when we are building powerful AI systems. Best start believing in science fiction stories, because you’re living in one. 
And it’s pretty rich to say that those warning that all humans could die from this ‘sound like religion’ when you’re the CEO of a company that is literally named Anthropic. Also you opened the post by quoting Carl Sagan’s Contact. 
Does that mean those involved played a perfect or even great game? Absolutely not. Certainly there were key mistakes, and some private actors engaged in overreach. The pause letter in particular was a mistake and I said so at the time. Such overreach is present in absolutely every important cause in history, and every single political movement. Several calls for regulation or model bills included compute thresholds that were too low, and again I said so at the time. 
If anything, most of those involved have been extraordinarily restrained. 
At some point, restraint means no one hears what you are saying. Dario here talks about ‘autonomy’ instead of ‘AI takeover’ or ‘everyone dies,’ and I think this failure to be blunt is a major weakness of the approach. So many wish to not listen, and Dario gives them that as an easy option.
Acknowledge uncertainty. There are plenty of ways in which the concerns I’m raising in this piece could be moot. Nothing here is intended to communicate certainty or even likelihood. Most obviously, AI may simply not advance anywhere near as fast as I imagine.
Or, even if it does advance quickly, some or all of the risks discussed here may not materialize (which would be great), or there may be other risks I haven’t considered. No one can predict the future with complete confidence—but we have to do the best we can to plan anyway.
On this point we mostly agree, especially that it might not progress so quickly. Dario should especially be prepared to be wrong about that, given his prediction is things will go much faster than most others predict. 
In terms of the risks, certainly we will have missed important ones, it is very possible we will avoid the ones we worry most about now, but I don’t think it’s reasonable to say the risks we worry about now might not materialize at all as capabilities advance. 
If AI becomes sufficiently advanced, yes the dangers will be there. The hope is that we will deal with them, perhaps in highly unexpected ways and with unexpected tools.  
Intervene as surgically as possible. Addressing the risks of AI will require a mix of voluntary actions taken by companies (and private third-party actors) and actions taken by governments that bind everyone. The voluntary actions—both taking them and encouraging other companies to follow suit—are a no-brainer for me. I firmly believe that government actions will also be required to some extent, but these interventions are different in character because they can potentially destroy economic value or coerce unwilling actors who are skeptical of these risks (and there is some chance they are right!).
… It is easy to say, “No action is too extreme when the fate of humanity is at stake!,” but in practice this attitude simply leads to backlash.
It is almost always wise to intervene as surgically as possible, provided you still do enough to get the job done. And yes, if we want to do very costly interventions we will need better evidence and need better consensus. But context matters here. In the past, Anthropic has used such arguments as a kudgel against remarkably surgical interventions, including SB 1047. 
Anthropic’s Term Is ‘Powerful AI’
Dario quotes his definition from Machines of Loving Grace [ https://substack.com/redirect/ee14cb2f-6729-4349-9a5c-ce6ac25eed8b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: An AI smarter than a Nobel Prize winner across most relevant fields, with all the digital (but not physical) affordances available to a human, that can work autonomously for indefinite periods, and that can be run in parallel, or his ‘country of geniuses in a data center.’
Functionally I think this is a fine AGI alternative. For most purposes I have been liking my use of the term Sufficiently Advanced AI, but PAI works.
Dario Doubles Down on Dates of Dazzling Datacenter Daemons
As I wrote in Machines of Loving Grace [ https://substack.com/redirect/ee14cb2f-6729-4349-9a5c-ce6ac25eed8b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], powerful AI could be as little as 1–2 years away, although it could also be considerably further out.
That’s ‘could’ rather than ‘probably will be,’ so not a full doubling down.
In this essay Dario chooses his words carefully, and explains what he means. I worry that in other contexts, including within the past two weeks, Dario has been less careful, and that people will classify him as having made a stupid prediction if we don’t get his PAI by the end of 2027. 
I don’t find it likely that we get PAI by the end of 2027, I’d give it less than a 10% chance of happening, but I agree that this is not something we can rule out, that it is more than 1% likely, and that we want to be prepared in case it happens.
How You Gonna Keep Em Down On The Server Farm
​I think the best way to get a handle on the risks of AI is to ask the following question: suppose a literal “country of geniuses” were to materialize somewhere in the world in ~2027. Imagine, say, 50 million people, all of whom are much more capable than any Nobel Prize winner, statesman, or technologist.
…for every cognitive action we can take, this country can take ten.
What should you be worried about? I would worry about the following things:
Autonomy risks. What are the intentions and goals of this country? Is it hostile, or does it share our values? Could it militarily dominate the world through superior weapons, cyber operations, influence operations, or manufacturing?
Misuse for destruction. Assume the new country is malleable and “follows instructions”—and thus is essentially a country of mercenaries. Could existing rogue actors who want to cause destruction (such as terrorists) use or manipulate some of the people in the new country to make themselves much more effective, greatly amplifying the scale of destruction?
Misuse for seizing power. What if the country was in fact built and controlled by an existing powerful actor, such as a dictator or rogue corporate actor? Could that actor use it to gain decisive or dominant power over the world as a whole, upsetting the existing balance of power?
Economic disruption. If the new country is not a security threat in any of the ways listed in #1–3 above but simply participates peacefully in the global economy, could it still create severe risks simply by being so technologically advanced and effective that it disrupts the global economy, causing mass unemployment or radically concentrating wealth?
Indirect effects. The world will change very quickly due to all the new technology and productivity that will be created by the new country. Could some of these changes be radically destabilizing?
I think it should be clear that this is a dangerous situation—a report from a competent national security official to a head of state would probably contain words like “the single most serious national security threat we’ve faced in a century, possibly ever.” It seems like something the best minds of civilization should be focused on.
Conversely, I think it would be absurd to shrug and say, “Nothing to worry about here!” But, faced with rapid AI progress, that seems to be the view of many US policymakers, some of whom deny the existence of any AI risks, when they are not distracted entirely by the usual tired old hot-button issues. Humanity needs to wake up, and this essay is an attempt—a possibly futile one, but it’s worth trying—to jolt people awake.
Yes, even if those were the only things to worry about, that’s a super big deal.
My responses:
Yes, just yes, obviously if it wants to take over it can do that, and it probably effectively takes over even if it doesn’t try. Dario spends time later arguing they would ‘have a fairly good shot’ to avoid sounding too weird, and if you need convincing you should read that section of the essay, but come on.  
What are its intentions and goals? Great question.
Yeah, that is going to be a real problem. 
Given [X] can take over, if you can control [X] then you can take over, too.
Participation in economics would mean it effectively takes over, and rapidly has control over an increasing share of resources. Worry less about wealth concentration among the humans and more about wealth and with it power and influence acquisition by the AIs. Whether or not this causes mass unemployment right away is less clear, it might require a bunch of further improvements and technological advancements and deployments first. 
Yes, it would be radically destabilizing in the best case.
But all of this, even that these AIs could easily take over, buries the lede. If you had this nation of geniuses in a datacenter it would very obviously then make rapid further AI progress and go into full recursive self-improvement mode. It would quickly solve robotics, improve its compute efficiency, develop various other new technologies and so on. Thinking about what happens in this ‘steady state’ over a period of years is mostly asking a wrong question, as we will have already passed the point of no return.
If He Wanted To, He Would Have
Dario correctly quickly dismisses the ‘PAI won’t be able to take over if it tried’ arguments, and then moves on to whether it will try.
So Will He Want To?
Some people say the PAI definitely won’t want to take over, AIs only do what humans ask them to do. He provides convincing evidence that no, AIs do unexpected other stuff all the time. I’d add that also some people will tell the AIs to take over to varying degrees in various ways. 
Some people say PAI (or at least sufficiently advanced AI) will inevitably seek power or deceive humans. He cites but does not name instrumental convergence, as well as ‘AI will generalize that seeking power is good for achieving goals’ in a way described as a heuristic rather than being accurate. 
This “misaligned power-seeking” is the intellectual basis of predictions that AI will inevitably destroy humanity.​
The problem with this pessimistic position is that it mistakes a vague conceptual argument about high-level incentives—one that masks many hidden assumptions—for definitive proof.
Once again, no, this is not in any way necessary for AI to end up destroying humanity, or for AI causing the world to go down a path where humanity ends up destroyed (without attributing intent or direct causation). 
One of the most important hidden assumptions, and a place where what we see in practice has diverged from the simple theoretical model, is the implicit assumption that AI models are necessarily monomaniacally focused on a single, coherent, narrow goal, and that they pursue that goal in a clean, consequentialist manner.
This in particular is a clear strawmanning [ https://substack.com/redirect/8066b077-1e15-4ca7-bb13-796147da1abf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] of the position of the worried. As Rob Bensinger points out, there has been a book-length clarification of the actual position [ https://substack.com/redirect/e9ea690e-8591-465d-a4aa-6ef74cba04b4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], and LLMs will give you dramatically better summaries than Dario’s here. 
MIRI [ https://substack.com/redirect/72e8971c-cb59-43bf-a716-5641f963cfa8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: A common misconception—showing up even in @DarioAmodei 's recent essay—is that the classic case for worrying about AI risk assumes an AI "monomaniacally focused on a single, coherent, narrow goal."
But, as @ESYudkowsky explains, this is a misunderstanding of where the risk lies:
Eliezer Yudkowsky: Similarly: A paperclip maximizer is not "monomoniacally" "focused" on paperclips. We talked about a superintelligence that wanted 1 thing, because you get exactly the same results as from a superintelligence that wants paperclips and staples (2 things), or from a superintelligence that wants 100 things. The number of things It wants bears zero relevance to anything. It's just easier to explain the mechanics if you start with a superintelligence that wants 1 thing, because you can talk about how It evaluates "number of expected paperclips resulting from an action" instead of "expected paperclips * 2 + staples * 3 + giant mechanical clocks * 1000" and onward for a hundred other terms of Its utility function that all asymptote at different rates.
I’d also refer to this response from Harlan Stewart, especially the maintaining of plausible deniability by not specifying who is being responded to:
Harlan Stewart [ https://substack.com/redirect/4302b75f-14c2-486a-a408-dffa28c03991?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: I have a lot of thoughts about the Dario essay, and I want to write more of them up, but it feels exhausting to react to this kind of thing.
The parts I object to are mostly just iterations of the same messaging strategy the AI industry has been using over the last two years:
Discredit critics by strawmanning their arguments and painting them as crazy weirdos, while maintaining plausible deniability by not specifying which of your critics you're referring to.
Instead of engaging with critics' arguments in depth, dismiss them as being too "theoretical." Emphasize the virtue of using "empirical evidence," and use such a narrow definition of "empirical evidence" that it leaves no choice but to keep pushing ahead and see what happens, because the future will always be uncertain.
Reverse the burden of proof. Instead of it being your responsibility to demonstrate that your R&D project will not destroy the world, say that you will need definitive proof that it will destroy the world before changing course.
Predict that superhumanly powerful minds will be built within a matter of years, while also suggesting that this timeline somehow gives adequate time for an iterative, trial-and-error approach to alignment.
So again, no, none of that is being assumed. Power is useful for any goal it does not directly contradict, whether it be one narrow goal or a set of complex goals (which, for a sufficiently advanced AI, collapses to the same thing). Power is highly useful. It is especially useful when you are uncertain what your ultimate goal is going to be. 
Consequentialism is also not required for this. A system of virtue ethics would conclude it is good to grow more powerful. A deontologically based system would conclude the same thing to the extent it wasn’t designed to effectively be rather dumb, even if it pursued this under its restrictions. And so on.
While current AIs are best understood by treating them as what Dario calls ‘psychologically complex’ (however literally you do or don’t take that), one should expect a sufficiently advanced AI to ‘get over it’ and effectively act optimally. The psychological complexity is the way of best dealing with various limitations, and in practical terms we should expect that it falls away if and as the limitations fall away. This is indeed what you see when humans get sufficiently advanced in a subdomain.
However, there is a more moderate and more robust version of the pessimistic position which does seem plausible, and therefore does concern me.​
… Some fraction of those behaviors will have a coherent, focused, and persistent quality (indeed, as AI systems get more capable, their long-term coherence increases in order to complete lengthier tasks), and some fraction of those behaviors will be destructive or threatening.
… We don’t need a specific narrow story for how it happens, and we don’t need to claim it definitely will happen, we just need to note that the combination of intelligence, agency, coherence, and poor controllability is both plausible and a recipe for existential danger.
He goes on to add additional arguments and potential ways it could go down, such as extrapolating from science fiction or drawing ethical conclusions that become xenocidal, or that power seeking could emerge as a persona. Even if misalignment is not inevitable in any given instance, some instances becoming misaligned, and this causing them to be in some ways more fit and thus act in ways that make this dangerous, is completely inevitable as a default. 
Dario is asserting the extremely modest and obvious claim that building these PAIs is not a safe thing to do, that things could (as opposed to would, or probably will) get out of control. 
Yes, obviously they could get out of control. As Dario says Anthropic has already seen it happen during their own testing. If it doesn’t happen, it will be because we acted wisely and stopped it from happening. If it doesn’t become catastrophic, it will similarly be because we acted wisely and stopped that from happening.
The Balance of Power
Second, some may object that we can simply keep AIs in check with a balance of power between many AI systems, as we do with humans. The problem is that while humans vary enormously, AI systems broadly share training and alignment techniques across the industry, and those techniques may fail in a correlated way.
Furthermore, given the cost of training such systems, it may even be the case that all systems are essentially derived from a very small number of base models.
Additionally, even if a small fraction of AI instances are misaligned, they may be able to take advantage of offense-dominant [ https://substack.com/redirect/bae5c7c1-2925-4a5c-bdc7-50e277013d3b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] technologies, such that having “good” AIs to defend against the bad AIs is not necessarily always effective.
I think this is far from the only problem. 
Humans are not so good at maintaining a balance of power. Power gets quite unbalanced quite a lot, and what balance we do have comes at very large expense. We’ve managed to keep some amount of balance in large part because individual humans can only be in one place at a time, with highly limited physical and cognitive capacity, and thus have to coordinate with other humans in unreliable ways and with all the associated incentive problems, and also humans age and die, and we have strong natural egalitarian instincts, and so on. 
So, so many of the things that work for human balance of power simply don’t apply in the AI scenarios, even before you consider that the AIs will largely be instances of the same model, and even without that likely will be good enough at decision theory to be essentially perfectly coordinated. 
I’d also say the reverse of what Dario says in one aspect. Humans vary enormously in some senses, but they also all tap out at reasonably similar levels when healthy. Humans don’t scale. AIs vary so much more than humans do, especially when one can have orders of magnitude more hardware and copies of itself available. 
The third objection he raises, that AI companies test their AIs before release, is not a serious reason to not worry about any of this.
Defenses of Autonomy
He thinks there are four categories (this is condensed):
First, it is important to develop the science of reliably training and steering AI models, of forming their personalities in a predictable, stable, and positive direction. One of our core innovations (aspects of which have since been adopted by other AI companies) is Constitutional AI [ https://substack.com/redirect/7647ecc4-ffa9-48d4-916b-abaabfeafd57?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
Anthropic has just published its most recent constitution [ https://substack.com/redirect/35aad217-07ec-4d1c-aab3-2c92633857e7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], and one of its notable features is that instead of giving Claude a long list of things to do and not do (e.g., “Don’t help the user hotwire a car”), the constitution attempts to give Claude a set of high-level principles and values. 
We believe that a feasible goal for 2026 is to train Claude in such a way that it almost never goes against the spirit of its constitution.
I have a three-part series on the recent Claude constitution. It is an extraordinary document and I think it is the best approach we can currently implement.
​As I write in that serious, I don’t think this works on its own as an ‘endgame’ strategy but it could help us quite a lot along the way.
​The second thing we can do is develop the science of looking inside AI models to diagnose their behavior so that we can identify problems and fix them. This is the science of interpretability, and I’ve talked about its importance in previous essays [ https://substack.com/redirect/da9a6ede-8f56-4ea1-994c-5d3c9defdf15?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
The unique value of interpretability is that by looking inside the model and seeing how it works, you in principle have the ability to deduce what a model might do in a hypothetical situation you can’t directly test—which is the worry with relying solely on constitutional training and empirical testing of behavior.
Constitutional AI (along with similar alignment methods) and mechanistic interpretability are most powerful when used together, as a back-and-forth process of improving Claude’s training and then testing for problems.
I agree that interpretability is a useful part of the toolbox, although we need to be very careful with it lest it stop working or we think we know more than we do. 
​The third thing we can do to help address autonomy risks is to build the infrastructure necessary to monitor our models in live internal and external use, and publicly share any problems we find.
Transparency and sharing problems is also useful, sure, although it is not a solution.
​The fourth thing we can do is encourage coordination to address autonomy risks at the level of industry and society.
For example, some AI companies have shown a disturbing negligence towards the sexualization of children in today’s models, which makes me doubt that they’ll show either the inclination or the ability to address autonomy risks in future models.
In addition, the commercial race between AI companies will only continue to heat up, and while the science of steering models can have some commercial benefits, overall the intensity of the race will make it increasingly hard to focus on addressing autonomy risks.
I believe the only solution is legislation—laws that directly affect the behavior of AI companies, or otherwise incentivize R&D to solve these issues. Here it is worth keeping in mind the warnings I gave at the beginning of this essay about uncertainty and surgical interventions.
You can see here, as he talks about, ‘autonomy risks,’ that this doesn’t have the punch it would have if you called it something that made the situation clear. ‘Autonomy risks’ sounds very nice and civilized, not like ‘AIs take over’ or ‘everyone dies.’
You can also see the attempt to use a normie example, sexualization of children, where the parallel doesn’t work so well, except as a pure ‘certain companies I won’t name have been so obviously deeply irresponsible that they obviously will keep being like that.’ Which is a fair point, but the fact that Anthropic, Google and OpenAI have been good on such issues does not give me much comfort.
What’s the pitch?
Anthropic’s view has been that the right place to start is with transparency legislation, which essentially tries to require that every frontier AI company engage in the transparency practices I’ve described earlier in this section. California’s SB 53 [ https://substack.com/redirect/892a5ed1-1dc0-410d-8b10-596ec5a8e8a3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] and New York’s RAISE Act [ https://substack.com/redirect/d97df689-52d0-4a25-800e-1ac3b5fee0d6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] are examples of this kind of legislation, which Anthropic supported and which have successfully passed. In supporting and helping to craft these laws, we’ve put a particular focus on trying to minimize collateral damage, for example by exempting smaller companies unlikely to produce frontier models from the law.​
Anthropic has had a decidedly mixed relationship with efforts along these lines, although they ultimately did support these recent minimalist efforts. I agree it is a fine place to start, but then were do you go after that? Anthropic was deeply reluctant even with extremely modest proposals and I worry this will continue. 
Weapon of Mass Destruction
If everyone has a genius in their pocket, will some people use it to do great harm? What happens when you no longer need rare technical skills to case catastrophe? 
Dario focuses on biological risks here, noting that LLMs are already substantially reducing barriers, but that skill barriers remain high. In the future, things could become far worse on such fronts.
This is a tricky situation, especially if you are trying to get people to take it seriously. Every time nothing has happened yet people relax further. You only find out afterwards if things went too far and there’s broad uncertainty about where that is. Meanwhile, there are other things we can do to mitigate risk but right now we are failing in maximally undignified ways:
An MIT study [ https://substack.com/redirect/26d07707-c5d6-476d-8e3c-5d8b7739e7db?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] found that 36 out of 38 providers fulfilled an order containing the sequence of the 1918 flu.​
The counterargument is, essentially, People Don’t Do Things, and the bad guys who  try for real are rare and also rather bad at actually accomplishing anything. If this wasn’t true the world would already look very different, for reasons unrelated to AI. 
The best objection is one that I’ve rarely seen raised: that there is a gap between the models being useful in principle and the actual propensity of bad actors to use them. Most individual bad actors are disturbed individuals, so almost by definition their behavior is unpredictable and irrational—and it’s these bad actors, the unskilled ones, who might have stood to benefit the most from AI making it much easier to kill many people.​
One problem with this situation is that damage from such incidents is on a power law, up to and including global pandemics or worse. So the fact that the ‘bad guys’ are not taking so many competent shots on goal means that the first shot that hits could be quite catastrophically bad. Once that happens, many mistakes already made cannot be undone, both in terms of the attack and the availability of the LLMs, especially if they are open models. 
It’s great that capability in theory doesn’t usually translate into happening in practice, and we’re basically able to use security through obscurity, but when that fails it can really fail hard.
Defenses Against Biological Attacks
What can we do?
​Here I see three things we can do.
First, AI companies can put guardrails on their models to prevent them from helping to produce bioweapons. Anthropic is very actively doing this.
But all models can be jailbroken [ https://substack.com/redirect/81a3e213-6027-4d28-8645-e7bef669b30a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], and so as a second line of defense, we’ve implemented (since mid-2025, when our tests showed our models were starting to get close to the threshold where they might begin to pose a risk) a classifier that specifically detects and blocks bioweapon-related outputs.
To their credit, some other AI companies have implemented classifiers as well [ https://substack.com/redirect/e1867cd5-528d-4d3f-a2e9-3d81e0966b5c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. But not every company has, and there is also nothing requiring companies to keep their classifiers. I am concerned that over time there may be a prisoner’s dilemma [ https://substack.com/redirect/34f7482c-f8fd-4ed6-b0e5-b2dcc189e715?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] where companies can defect and lower their costs by removing classifiers.
You can jailbreak any model. You can get around any classifier. In practice, the bad guys mostly won’t, for the same reasons discussed earlier, so ‘make it sufficiently hard and annoying’ works. That’s not the best long term solution.
But ultimately defense may require government action, which is the second thing we can do.​ My views here are the same as they are for addressing autonomy risks: we should start with transparency requirements [ https://substack.com/redirect/8b3a498b-f308-4b28-a00b-b5e69465e1bc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
Then, if and when we reach clearer thresholds of risk, we can craft legislation that more precisely targets these risks and has a lower chance of collateral damage.
Finally, the third countermeasure we can take is to try to develop defenses against biological attacks themselves.
This could include monitoring and tracking for early detection, investments in air purification R&D (such as far-UVC [ https://substack.com/redirect/b69d0e2c-0366-418e-be05-5c93b2e215dc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] disinfection), rapid vaccine development that can respond and adapt to an attack, better personal protective equipment (PPE), and treatments or vaccinations for some of the most likely biological agents. 
mRNA vaccines [ https://substack.com/redirect/437d8ebe-2ed4-4560-9fe3-cac6a2307238?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], which can be designed to respond to a particular virus or variant, are an early example of what is possible here [ https://substack.com/redirect/901cfb3e-a581-4269-91dc-1ad2b9d78815?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
We aren’t even doing basic things like ‘don’t hand exactly the worst flu virus to whoever asks for it’ so yes there is a lot to do in developing physical defenses. Alas, our response to the Covid pandemic has been worse than useless, with Moderna actively stopping work on mRNA vaccines due to worries about not getting approved, and we definitely aren’t working much on air purification, far-UVC or PPE.
If people who otherwise want to push forward were supporting at least those kinds of countermeasures more vocally and strongly, as opposed to letting us slide backwards, I’d respect such voices quite a lot more.
On the direct regulation of AI front, yes I think we need to at least have transparency requirements, and it will likely make sense soon to legally require various defenses be built into frontier AI systems.
One Model To Rule Them All
In Machines of Loving Grace [ https://substack.com/redirect/ee14cb2f-6729-4349-9a5c-ce6ac25eed8b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], I discussed the possibility that authoritarian governments might use powerful AI to surveil or repress their citizens in ways that would be extremely difficult to reform or overthrow. Current autocracies are limited in how repressive they can be by the need to have humans carry out their orders, and humans often have limits in how inhumane they are willing to be. But AI-enabled autocracies would not have such limits.
​Worse yet, countries could also use their advantage in AI to gain power over other countries.
That’s a really bizarre ‘worse yet’ isn’t it? Most every technology in history has been used to get an advantage in power by some countries over other countries. It’s not obviously good or bad for nation [X] to have power over nation [Y]. 
America certainly plans to use AI to gain power. If you asked ‘what country is most likely to use AI to try to impose its will on other nations’ the answer would presumably be the United States.
There are many ways in which AI could enable, entrench, or expand autocracy, but I’ll list a few that I’m most worried about. Note that some of these applications have legitimate defensive uses, and I am not necessarily arguing against them in absolute terms; I am nevertheless worried that they structurally tend to favor autocracies:
Fully autonomous weapons.
​AI surveillance. Sufficiently powerful AI could likely be used to compromise any computer system in the world, and could also use the access obtained in this way to read and make sense of all the world’s electronic communications.
AI propaganda.
Strategic decision-making.
If your AI can compromise any computer system in the world and make sense of all the world’s information, perhaps AI surveillance should be rather far down on your list of worries for that? 
Certainly misuse of AI for various purposes is a real threat, but let us not lack imagination. An AI capable of all this can do so much more. In terms of who is favored in such scenarios, assuming we continue to disregard fully what Dario calls ‘autonomy risks,’ the obvious answer is whoever has access to the most geniuses in the data centers willing to cooperate with them, combined with who has access to capital. 
Dario’s primary worry is the CCP, especially if it takes the lead in AI, noting that the most likely to suffer here are the Chinese themselves. Democracies competitive in AI are listed second, with the worry that AI would be used to route around democracy. 
AI companies are only listed fourth, behind other autocracies. Curious.
It’s less that autocracy becomes favored in such scenarios, as that the foundations of democracy by default will stop working. The people won’t be in the loops, won’t play a key part in having new ideas or organizing or expanding the economy, won’t be key to military or state power, you won’t need lots of people willing to carry out the will of the state, and so on. The reasons democracy historically wins may potentially be going away.
Defenses Against Autocracy 
At last we at least one easy policy intervention we can get behind.
​First, we should absolutely not be selling chips, chip-making tools, or datacenters to the CCP…. It makes no sense to sell the CCP the tools with which to build an AI totalitarian state and possibly conquer us militarily.
A number of complicated arguments are made to justify such sales, such as the idea that “spreading our tech stack around the world” allows “America to win” in some general, unspecified economic battle. In my view, this is like selling nuclear weapons to North Korea and then bragging that the missile casings are made by Boeing and so the US is “winning.”
Yes. Well said. It really is this simple.
​Second, it makes sense to use AI to empower democracies to resist autocracies. This is the reason Anthropic considers it important to provide AI to the intelligence and defense communities in the US and its democratic allies.
Third, we need to draw a hard line against AI abuses within democracies. There need to be limits to what we allow our governments to do with AI, so that they don’t seize power or repress their own people. The formulation I have come up with is that we should use AI for national defense in all ways except those which would make us more like our autocratic adversaries.
Where should the line be drawn? In the list at the beginning of this section, two items—using AI for domestic mass surveillance and mass propaganda—seem to me like bright red lines and entirely illegitimate.
The other two items—fully autonomous weapons and AI for strategic decision-making—are harder lines to draw since they have legitimate uses in defending democracy, while also being prone to abuse.
It is difficult to draw clear lines on such questions, but you do have to draw the lines somewhere, and that has to be a painful action if it’s going to work.
​Fourth, after drawing a hard line against AI abuses in democracies, we should use that precedent to create an international taboo against the worst abuses of powerful AI. I recognize that the current political winds have turned against international cooperation and international norms, but this is a case where we sorely need them.
It is not, as he says and shall we say, a good time to be asking for norms of this type, for various reasons. If we continue down our current path, it doesn’t look good.
Fifth and finally, AI companies should be carefully watched, as should their connection to the government, which is necessary, but must have limits and boundaries​
Dario is severely limited here in what he can say out loud, and perhaps in what he allows himself to think. I encourage each of us to think seriously about what one would say if such restrictions did not apply.
They Took Our Jobs
Ah, good, some simple economic disruption problems. Every essay needs a break.
​In Machines of Loving Grace [ https://substack.com/redirect/ee14cb2f-6729-4349-9a5c-ce6ac25eed8b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], I suggest that a 10–20% sustained annual GDP growth rate may be possible.
But it should be clear that this is a double-edged sword: what are the economic prospects for most existing humans in such a world?
There are two specific problems I am worried about: labor market displacement, and concentration of economic power.
Dario starts off pushing back against those who think AI couldn’t possibly disrupt labor markets and cause mass unemployment, crying ‘lump of labor fallacy’ or what not, so he goes through the motions to show he understands all that including the historical context.
It’s possible things will go roughly the same way with AI, but I would bet pretty strongly against it. Here are some reasons I think AI is likely to be different:
​Speed.
Cognitive breadth.
Slicing by cognitive ability.
Ability to fill in the gaps.
Slow diffusion of technology is definitely real [ https://substack.com/redirect/4613f564-4a9e-4439-b19a-3009237b45b6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]—I talk to people from a wide variety of enterprises, and there are places where the adoption of AI will take years. That’s why my prediction for 50% of entry level white collar jobs being disrupted is 1–5 years, even though I suspect we’ll have powerful AI (which would be, technologically speaking, enough to do most or all jobs, not just entry level) in much less than 5 years.
Second, some people say that human jobs will move to the physical world, which avoids the whole category of “cognitive labor” where AI is progressing so rapidly. I am not sure how safe this is, either.
Third, perhaps some tasks inherently require or greatly benefit from a human touch. I’m a little more uncertain about this one, but I’m still skeptical that it will be enough to offset the bulk of the impacts I described above.
Fourth, some may argue that comparative advantage will still protect humans. Under the law of comparative advantage [ https://substack.com/redirect/4214562e-475f-4540-bcb2-11f1b875f70f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], even if AI is better than humans at everything, any relative differences between the human and AI profile of skills creates a basis of trade and specialization between humans and AI. The problem is that if AIs are literally thousands of times more productive than humans, this logic starts to break down. Even tiny transaction costs [ https://substack.com/redirect/c5a29406-4675-4ed1-a23e-ac1e7f1b6150?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] could make it not worth it for AI to trade with humans. And human wages may be very low, even if they technically have something to offer.
Dario’s basic explanation here is solid, especially since he’s making a highly tentative and conservative case. He’s portraying a scenario where things in many senses move remarkably slowly, and the real question is not ‘why would this disrupt employment’ but ‘why wouldn’t this be entirely transformative even if it is not deadly.’ 
Don’t Let Them Take Our Jobs
Okay, candlemakers, lay out your petitions.
​What can we do about this problem? I have several suggestions, some of which Anthropic is already doing.
The first thing is simply to get accurate data about what is happening with job displacement in real time.
Second, AI companies have a choice in how they work with enterprises. The very inefficiency of traditional enterprises means that their rollout of AI can be very path dependent, and there is some room to choose a better path. 
Third, companies should think about how to take care of their employees.
Fourth, wealthy individuals have an obligation to help solve this problem. It is sad to me that many wealthy individuals (especially in the tech industry) have recently adopted a cynical and nihilistic attitude that philanthropy is inevitably fraudulent or useless.
All of Anthropic’s co-founders have pledged to donate 80% of our wealth, and Anthropic’s staff have individually pledged to donate company shares worth billions at current prices—donations that the company has committed to matching.
Fifth, while all the above private actions can be helpful, ultimately a macroeconomic problem this large will require government intervention.
Ultimately, I think of all of the above interventions as ways to buy time.
The last line is the one that matters most. Mostly all you can do is buy a little time.
If you want to try and do more than that, and the humans can remain alive and in control (or in Dario’s term ‘we solve the autonomy problem’) then you can engage in massive macroeconomic redistribution, either by government or by the wealthy or both. There will be enough wealth around, and value produced, that everyone can have material abundance.
That doesn’t protect jobs. To protect jobs in such a scenario, you would need to explicitly protect jobs via protectionism and restrictions. I don’t love that idea.
Economic Concentrations of Power
Assuming everyone is doing fine materially, the real problem with economic inequality is the problem of economic concentration of power. Dario worries that too much wealth concentration would break society.
Democracy is ultimately backstopped by the idea that the population as a whole is necessary for the operation of the economy. If that economic leverage goes away, then the implicit social contract of democracy may stop working.
So that’s the thing. That leverage is going to go away. I don’t see any distribution of wealth changing that inevitability. ​
What can be done?
First, and most obviously, companies should simply choose not to be part of it.​
By this he means that companies (and individuals) can choose to advocate in the public interest, rather than in the interests of themselves or the wealthy. 
Second, the AI industry needs a healthier relationship with government—one based on substantive policy engagement rather than political alignment.​
That is a two way street. Both sides have to be willing.
Dario frames Anthropic’s approach as being principled, and willing to take a stand for what they believe in. As I’ve said before, I’m very much for standing up for what you believe in, and in some cases I’m very much for pragmatism, and I think it’s actively good that Anthropic does a mix of both. 
My concern is that Anthropic’s actions have not been on the Production Possibilities Frontier. As in, I feel Anthropic has spoken up in ways that don’t help much but that burn a bunch of political capital with key actors, and also Anthropic has failed to speak up in places where they could have helped a lot at small or no expense. As long as we stick to the frontier, we can talk price. 
Unknown Unknowns
Dario calls this the ‘black seas of infinity,’ of various indirect effects.
Suppose we address all the risks described so far, and begin to reap the benefits of AI. We will likely get a “century of scientific and economic progress compressed into a decade [ https://substack.com/redirect/0b748a1e-1a47-4967-a6d4-d3eca24f8b0b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ],” and this will be hugely positive for the world, but we will then have to contend with the problems that arise from this rapid rate of progress, and those problems may come at us fast.​
This would include: 
​Rapid advances in biology.
AI changes human life in an unhealthy way.
Human purpose.
On biology, the idea that extending lifespan might make people power-seeking or unstable strikes me as way more science fiction than anything that those worried about AI have prominently said. I think this distinction is illustrative. 
Science fiction (along with fantasy) usually has a rule that if you seek an ‘unnatural’ or ‘unfair’ benefit, that there must be some sort of ‘catch’ to it. Something will go horribly wrong. The price must be paid. 
Why? Because there is no story without it, and because we want to tell ourselves why it is okay that we are dumb and grow old and die. That’s why. Also, because it’s wrong [ https://substack.com/redirect/c32e4f9d-efed-46b0-ba1c-e7ea148809d9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. You ‘shouldn’t’ want to be smarter [ https://substack.com/redirect/22fad15d-ecf6-4119-a6cd-9773430bec51?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], or live forever [ https://substack.com/redirect/48ec3c6c-b59d-4d8e-8149-a4a809ff3748?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], or be or look younger [ https://substack.com/redirect/16ba2a56-2203-4645-8f20-db7062e65f5a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], or create a man artificially [ https://substack.com/redirect/08d89be8-604a-4208-9a74-23a3dd663ebb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. Such hubris, such blasphemy. 
Not that there aren’t trade-offs with new technologies, especially in terms of societal adjustments, but the alternative remains among other issues the planetary death rate of 100%.
AI ‘changing human life in an unhealthy way’ will doubtless happen in dozens of ways if we are so lucky as to be around for it to happen. It will also enhance our life in other ways. Dario does some brainstorming, including reinventing the whispering earring [ https://substack.com/redirect/7d5f1bb6-4705-4b2f-8d6b-1f9c630a9b94?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], and also loss of purpose which is sufficiently obvious it counts as a Known Known.
Oh Well Back To Racing
Sounds like we have some big problems, even if we accept Dario’s framing of the geniuses in the data center basically sitting around being ordinary geniuses rather than quickly proceeding to the next phase. 
It’s a real shame we can’t actually do anything about them that would cost us anything, or speak aloud about what we want to be protecting other than ‘democracy.’
​Furthermore, the last few years should make clear that the idea of stopping or even substantially slowing the technology is fundamentally untenable.
I do see a path to a slight moderation in AI development that is compatible with a realist view of geopolitics [ https://substack.com/redirect/5c917916-1ac3-4de6-a13f-aad34e9ff4bf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
This is where we are. We’re about to go down a path likely to kill literally everyone, and the responsible one is saying maybe we can ‘see a path to’ a slight moderation.
He doesn’t even talk about building capacity to potentially slow down or intercede, if the situation should call for it. I think we should read this as, essentially, ‘I cannot rhetorically be seen talking about that, and thus my failure to mention it should not be much evidence of whether I think this would be a good idea.’ 
Harlan Stewart notes a key rhetorical change, and not for the better:
Harlan Stewart [ https://substack.com/redirect/1868d76a-8f12-43ce-9318-c2372454d78e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: You flipped the burden of proof. In 2023, Anthropic’s position was:
“Indications that we are in a pessimistic or near-pessimistic scenario may be sudden and hard to spot. We should therefore always act under the assumption that we still may be in such a scenario unless we have sufficient evidence that we are not.”
But in this essay, you say:
“To be clear, I think there’s a decent chance we eventually reach a point where much more significant action is warranted, but that will depend on stronger evidence of imminent, concrete danger than we have today, as well as enough specificity about the danger to formulate rules that have a chance of addressing it.”
Here is how the essay closes:
But we will need to step up our efforts if we want to succeed. The first step is for those closest to the technology to simply tell the truth about the situation humanity is in, which I have always tried to do; I’m doing so more explicitly and with greater urgency with this essay. 
The next step will be convincing the world’s thinkers, policymakers, companies, and citizens of the imminence and overriding importance of this issue—that it is worth expending thought and political capital on this in comparison to the thousands of other issues that dominate the news every day. Then there will be a time for courage, for enough people to buck the prevailing trends and stand on principle, even in the face of threats to their economic interests and personal safety.
The years in front of us will be impossibly hard, asking more of us than we think we can give. But in my time as a researcher, leader, and citizen, I have seen enough courage and nobility to believe that we can win—that when put in the darkest circumstances, humanity has a way of gathering, seemingly at the last minute, the strength and wisdom needed to prevail. We have no time to lose.​
Yes. This stands in sharp contrast with the writings of Sam Altman over at OpenAI [ https://substack.com/redirect/e5298ac4-7f58-4674-841b-eaecd55c58bd?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], where he talks about cool ideas and raising revenue. 
The years in front of us will be impossibly hard (in some ways), asking more of us than we think we can give. That goes for Dario as well. What he thinks can be done is not going to get it done. 
Dario’s strategy is that we have a history of pulling through seemingly at the last minute under dark circumstances. You know, like Inspector Clouseau, The Flash or Buffy the Vampire Slayer. 
He is the CEO of a frontier AI company called Anthropic.
​

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.CSJp9LSRn8U7t46B1Y_M8Mq_vdZafbZfZv1Or6g_xS8?