View this post on the web at https://riverkenna.substack.com/p/orthogonal-gravities

Imagine your body generates a little magnetic field. Imagine that this field is charged by your thoughts, your moods, your neuroses and habits and longings and actions. Imagine that all of these things change the quality of that magnetic field, such that it magnetizes different types of things, experiences, people, and gifts to you.
(Now stop imagining, cuz if I’m being honest I’m pretty sure that’s just How Things Are, actually.)
Imagine (if you must keep imagining) that the relationship was weird and complex,  between your magnetic field  and your thoughts/moods/neuroses/habits/longings/actions/etc.
(That’s very clunky — let’s just call all that stuff your  ‘atmosphere’.)
(And while we’re at it — “magnetic field” helps explain this better, but my experience of this is closer to gravity than magnetism, so I’m switching to gravity.)
Imagine that the relationship between your atmosphere and your gravity field seems unpredictable and paradoxical. Sometimes you long for something, and it shows up in your life. Sometimes you deeply fear something, and it shows up in your life. Sometimes you both long for and fear something, and what shows up in your life is a very precise and very difficult lesson about the ways you need to untangle your relationship with that thing so your soul can grow.
You try to use this gravitational field to attract things you want into your life, but your conscious thoughts only seem to account for a small effect — and often an unpredictable effect. You could just as easily bring the thing you want into your orbit as you could accidentally bring in the fears you associate with not having it. It’s a bit of a crapshot.
So much of your atmosphere — this deciding factor in how the gravity attracts the world to you — so much of it is unconscious. It’s not under your control. Your deep fears and ingrained schemas are pulling the world in fear- and shame-based ways, no matter how much your conscious thoughts try to gravitate in other directions.
Now imagine, if you will, that you could mostly disconnect your unconscious from your gravity field. You could use particular techniques to soften the effect of your unconscious fears and schemas, and strengthen the effects of your conscious desires. Would you do it? Should you do it?
I’m conflicted on this.
As far as I’ve seen, both spiritual advancement and spiritual power are real things — and they are, to a large degree, orthogonal to one another. You can cultivate a lot of spiritual power without necessarily going anywhere on the path; and you can move along the spiritual path and become an increasingly free and liberated soul without necessarily cultivating much spiritual power. 
They go well together, in a lot of ways, but they aren’t exactly joined at the hip.
But it seems very good for them to be connected — even if it creates some painful situations.
See, the enemy of the spiritual path is ignorance, and especially ignorance about yourself. We’re really good at staying blind to the unconscious parts of our inner atmospheres that hobble our lives over and over and over again. It can take a lifetime to notice a deep unconscious knot that’s been keeping you in ignorance for decades. And you only tend to recognize and work with these when it first becomes too painful to not see it — and then when it becomes too painful to not do something about it.
Which means that having your gravity field connected to that engine of the unconscious, with all its harmful patterns and outdated schemas and ugly little neurotic knots about you and your relationships — that’s a gift. A painful gift, but an utterly invaluable one. Because it will keep drawing into your life, over and over again, an endless series of breadcrumbs back to what’s within you. 
You’ll get the things you want, and find out why they’re bad for you. You’ll get the things you fear, and be accosted by them again and again. You’ll bring into your orbit every inescapable pattern, every archetypal figure, every painful situation that’s stuck in the deep grime of your psyche — and at a certain point, you’ll be unable to ignore them. One by one, you’ll have to actually deal with them. You’ll have to dive beneath the surface of what you want to see what deep desires you’ve been covering up, which voids you’ve been filling with junk, which fears have been driving your decisions, which archetypal figures have been twisting your life and scattering your energy sideways and generally fucking you up.
It seems possible to by and large detach the gravity field from these unconscious atmospheres. You can look out at the world and see some people who have done it, as far as I can tell. People whose eyes are empty, but their wallets, beds, and portfolios are full to bursting. 
I’m pretty sure it’s a form of spiritual injury. An injury many of us might pray for, wish for, beg for — but an injury nonetheless.
It’s a thankless job, allowing the gravity field of your Being to attract everything that’s within you, sifting to see, year by year, if what’s within you has changed, if it’s harmonized, if you’ve really given up those old patterns and desires, or if they keep finding you again and again. It’s not always fun, finding out that you’re still attracting the same kinds of partners, the same financial situations, the same types of blessings that end up biting you in the ass. 
But it is an excellent barometer of what’s actually on the move in you. And trying to blunt that barometer in the name of letting the conscious ego take the wheel of the gravity well seems like an extremely fun form of misguided self-harm.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.NenM1eMkZkAcsx4aFhUv_47oMFc4P3A2xROBD1qNKWA?