View this post on the web at https://www.forkingpaths.co/p/three-days-as-a-london-cop

I: Gun on the High Street
It’s 2pm, on a crisp, wintry Tuesday afternoon. I’ve just settled into the back of a squad car around the back of Hammersmith Police Station, ready to ride along with the cops who get dispatched to emergency 999 calls in Britain’s capital. For the next eight hours, where they go, I go. 
In the drivers’ seat is Police Constable Martin Allan, a friendly tree trunk of a man, with biceps as wide as his constant, toothy grin. Wrapping around one arm is a sprawling tattoo of an octopus [ https://substack.com/redirect/20060487-ff59-4080-9cba-b60ef6f533d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. “That tattoo is awesome,” I say, figuring small talk is an essential beginning to what’s sure to be a slow start to a mid-afternoon, mid-week shift. “Thanks,” he replies. “My sister is a tattoo artist. So all it cost me was a dinner at Wagamama’s.” The cheeky grin returns.
Then, the police radio crackles, cutting through my laughter:
“Man brandishing gun, subject last seen walking on Dawes Road.”
Instantly, reflexively, PC Allan flicks on the sirens and blue lights, the wail matched by the roaring sound of a fully revved engine. Here, any gun brandished in public is a big deal. (There are vanishingly few firearms on Britain’s streets. The US gun murder rate is about three hundred times higher.)
Adrenaline starts flowing. My body is pinned backward to the rear seat from the rapid acceleration, as the squad car races forward. I look at the odometer, which hits sixty miles an hour, then slams to zero, as Allan expertly weaves the car through densely packed traffic in London’s narrow streets, ever-alert for pedestrians, cyclists, and distracted drivers.
We park around the corner, waiting for the armed response unit to arrive. Sixty seconds of silence later, the radio crackles again. “Suspect is apparently barefoot and wearing shorts.” This strikes me as odd; it’s barely above freezing outside.
Ten more minutes of tension elapse, as we await word from the armed response unit. The radio beeps. We’re stood down—not because they have successfully disarmed the criminal, but because the man in question is mentally unwell, homeless, and brandishing nothing more than a long-handled barbecue lighter which has been mistaken for a firearm by a concerned member of the public.
In an area responsible for 200,000 residents, three out of four emergency response squad cars from Hammersmith station—and a large, specialist armed response contingent—had been pulled away from other critical jobs, all for a lighter. But with such high stakes, you have to take every call seriously. It was the first, but far from the last, iteration of a lesson I would quickly learn: in emergency police responses, nothing is ever as it seems.
II: The Rationale
Over three shifts across three months—24 hours in total—I shadowed London’s Metropolitan police officers, mostly in marked squad cars, but also several hours undercover in unmarked vehicles.
In previous research, I’ve written extensively [ https://substack.com/redirect/74f3ab2d-f057-40d5-ab37-a6772524f2f1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] about policing reform, how to reduce police violence [ https://substack.com/redirect/6366da37-e141-47b5-baeb-783d78a77d1a?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], why dysfunctional recruitment policies can attract bad cops [ https://substack.com/redirect/70afaa83-d198-4bcd-803e-4e52e1bef608?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], and testified about my research for the Angiolini Inquiry [ https://substack.com/redirect/75459ddf-039b-4348-ab32-be4fdff767f2?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] into the horrifying murder of Sarah Everard by a London police officer. I also grew up in Minneapolis, where George Floyd was murdered. It’s obvious that policing done wrong can do tremendous harm.
But most public scrutiny of policing lies at one of two extremes. There are the critiques that focus on scandals, abuse, and racism—institutional debacles that routinely and rightly make headlines. At the other end, there’s the genre of fawning true crime heroism, wherein clever detectives outsmart monstrous criminals with cutting-edge forensics.
These are the two prevailing narratives: the bad cops vs. the badass cops. 
Yet, each narrative represents a tiny sliver of what the police do, glossing over the complexities and uncertainty that’s embedded in routine, but adrenaline-filled eight hour shifts, increasingly aggressive oversight from above, and the dark humour and human fallibility that inevitably accompanies such a stressful, unpredictable, life or death job.
Narratives around policing are particularly polarized in the United States by long histories of racist and renegade departments and hardline political positions that range from naive blanket condemnation of police officers (with prescriptions to literally abolish the police [ https://substack.com/redirect/3c5e8f7d-bd64-419b-8efd-f48fc6d8f64d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]) to diehard Blue Lives Matter zealots who absolve even the most heinous police misconduct, including cold-blooded murder.
I decided to try something different: to understand daily policing in London’s Metropolitan Police, a highly scrutinized department that has had its share of high-profile scandals [ https://substack.com/redirect/dd5b0fb0-969d-4e7a-a48a-9f64365a1abb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], but has responded with real, aggressive efforts to recruit smarter, perform forceful oversight, cull bad apples, and insist on non-violent de-escalation whenever possible.
I wanted to find out: what was it like to respond to emergency calls on a routine shift? In the process, I learned that understanding the complexities and nuances of modern policing lies not in the extremes of scandals nor superheroes, but in the riveting uncertainty of everyday emergencies.
III: Nothing Is As It Seems 
Another evening shift. This time, I’m in a squad car driven by Ronan Boyce, a jovial but no-nonsense ex-soldier who previously served with the Irish Guards in Afghanistan’s Helmand Province, one of the worst places on Earth at the time of his deployment. His partner today is Oz Clayton, a smiley, gentle giant of a ginger-bearded Welshman who grew up in Aberystwyth, population 14,000. (The Met rotates emergency response partners daily, frequently with gender balance, an evidence-based strategy that reduces the risks of collusion, corruption, and abuse.)
There’s a bit of chatter on the radio about a fatal suicide jumper an hour earlier, but for us, it’s a rare moment of initial calm, with no outstanding calls waiting, so we begin to drive around. “Let’s see what the craic is, boys,” Boyce says in his lilting Irish accent, as we snake around residential streets and patrol downtrodden council estates. Suddenly, the car lurches to a halt. An emaciated figure down a dead-end road has spotted the squad car. He quickly stashes something in the bushes, before starting to jog away, red flags planted in every step of his behavior. We get out and approach him, and I notice he’s not just underfed, but his face and arms are covered in lesions.
“What did you just stash in that bush?” Boyce asks, calmly.
“You’ve got the wrong idea, man” he responds in heavily accented English. “I found a super good, um, frying pan and I didn’t want no one to take it, so I stuck it over in the bushes so it didn’t get stolen.”
“Alright, show me this ‘frying pan’,” Boyce responds, skepticism dripping from every word. The officers scrounge around in the bushes, looking for plastic baggies. To our surprise, there’s actually a frying pan. Yet, given the circumstances and the suspicious behavior, the man is handcuffed—a safety precaution that also ensures nothing gets swallowed during a suspected drug search. Boyce pats him down, ultimately pulling out about two dozen sterile, packaged needles from the man’s pockets, which he says he picked up from a nearby needle exchange programme. (This is better than the alternative. No officer wants to get unexpectedly pricked by a used needle.)
As the search continues, the man starts getting agitated and mildly aggressive, so Clayton starts making small talk, delivered with a friendly smile. He asks about where the man is from (“Romania, but I used to live in Rome”); where he’s traveled to in the UK (“Not to any of the good beaches, yet”); and the obvious follow-up: whether he prefers sandy or pebbly beaches (“Pebble beaches are shit, man.”) As the de-escalatory banter continues, the search has ended, and a quick database check reveals that the man isn’t wanted for any outstanding crimes, so they tell him he’s free to go.
“Hey—keep an eye on my pan for me!” the man says with a laugh.
“Good luck with the pasta!” Boyce calls back. We clamber back into the car. “He’s probably planning to sell that to someone for a pound,” Boyce tells me, and we shoot off.
Seconds later, an “I” Grade—or immediate—call comes through the police radio. A woman has been stabbed in her flat, with children present at the address. It’s unclear if the perpetrator is still there. Blue lights, screeching sirens, and the now-familiar lurching sensation of maximum acceleration followed by intense deceleration for speed bumps and road hazards. Boyce recognizes the address: it’s a known drug den for a prominent local kingpin. Sure enough, when we arrive, there’s a thicket of surveillance cameras pointing at the doors and windows; an innocuous Ring camera for Amazon deliveries, these are not.
A neighbor opens the door, giving us access to the shared hallway, and my heart pounds as I prepare myself for what’s about to come—violent confrontation, bloody death, human tragedy—as Boyce knocks on the door before trying to force entry.
Instead, a bewildered young woman answers.
“Have you been stabbed?” Boyce asks. She looks confused and asks him to repeat the question, as three enormous, aggressive barking dogs launch themselves toward the doorway, and Boyce takes a step back. They look like Bully XL’s, a banned breed in the UK, responsible for several fatal attacks. The woman comes out into the hallway, shutting the dogs inside. She looks tired, run down, but in a jean romper that’s definitively not covered in blood. She’s clearly not injured. “Has anyone else in the address been stabbed?” 
Her confusion clears as something clicks for her, and she starts fuming. “This is my ex; I know it is. This must have been Ricky. He’s called you and reported this. I can’t believe him.” She tells us that this former partner beat her, but she’s now with a good man—whom police know as a suspected drug kingpin.
Yet, through further radio traffic, it turns out the report didn’t come from Ricky; it was called in by a social worker. Apparently, they believed the children were at risk in the property, called in a false report of a stabbing to expedite the police response, and then refused to speak to dispatchers who followed-up. (“I’m done at 5:30, sorry I can’t help any more.”) 
Both officers take this absurd situation in stride, comforting the woman and checking on the kids. Nonetheless, the extraordinary mess, the whirlwind of detritus, the huge, aggressive dogs, and the suspected drug den makes the officers worried for the welfare of the children. But after further questioning, it’s clear the kids are just visiting the property, they don’t formally live there, and so there’s no obvious legal basis to institute a safeguarding order. With nothing else to be done, no imminent danger to life, and no way for an emergency response unit to steer those young lives out of an obviously bad situation, we load up and drive off.
The next call sounds amusingly sedate: a child has reportedly been pulled off some outdoor gym equipment in a public park, which has been reported as an assault. We drive to Normand Park, ready to settle a playground dispute.
Instead, we find something unexpectedly complex. A young Muslim girl in a headscarf has been forcefully grabbed off the gym equipment she was playing on and thrown to the ground by a woman who is still walking her German Shepherd around the park. We approach, with two other officers from another squad car. I hang back slightly, as Oz and Ronan politely chat to her.
She has an accent I can’t place, but repeats the same claim over and over, with strange pronunciation: “This was antisemitisme.” It’s unclear what she means, given that she was allegedly the aggressor, but she repeats the claim, saying that the children have been targeting her online.
“Do you know the children? They say they don’t know who you are.” 
“No, but they are targeting me on social media,” she replies.
This logical contradiction seems lost on her. Then, she notices me—an unknown man lingering nearby who’s not in uniform. She glares at me.
“Who is that? Why is he here? Is he from the far left?”
“He’s just here to help make sure we’re doing our job,” Boyce says.
Undeterred, she returns to the subject of the children. “They are from the Hamas,” she insists. “It’s antisemitisme.” 
“Are you Jewish?” Boyce asks.
“No, of course not, I’m Chilean,” she replies. 
Clocking that she is likely unwell, the officers politely try to explain to her that regardless of her perceptions of being targeted for a religion she isn’t part of, it’s not okay to grab a child and throw her to the ground.
“Show me the bruise,” she hisses triumphantly, as though a lack of a visible bruise on the child she has assaulted is some sort of vindicating trump card. But after a brief discussion, the parents make clear they don’t want to press charges; they just want the woman to leave them alone. Boyce, who has quietly told his partner that they’ll shortly institute a protection order banning her from the park, again takes the non-confrontational approach.
“Why don’t you try walking over to the Thames path instead? I know if I had a dog that’s where I’d be on a night like tonight.” She seems to take his advice and quietly exits the park. As we drive away, Boyce unexpectedly slows the car, as he notices that up ahead there’s an impromptu vigil being held for a gang member who was recently killed by a rival gang. He reverses, then turns around, aware that grief can easily turn toward anger—and that the police would not be a welcome sight. Proactive de-escalation in action.
Instead, we drive through Hammersmith’s busy shopping road—King Street. A man who’s clearly high out of his mind hobbles past quickly, trying, but failing, to jog. His trousers are falling off. He’s shouting random words and bobbing his head erratically. “Ah,” Boyce quips, “there goes Samuel Compton. I sectioned him a few weeks back. Glad to see he’s doing well.”
The next call that comes in sounds ominous: a utility worker has gone to an address, was unable to gain access, but noticed what looked like blood splotches on the window and swarms of flies in the kitchen. “That’s a dead body,” Boyce says. Blue lights and sirens. Clayton hands me two nitrile gloves. “Try not to touch anything,” he tells me, “but just in case, wear these.”
Once we’re two minutes away, though, another immediate grade call comes in. Multiple members of the public and employees at a Tesco have called 999, making clear this one’s real: a man has run into the grocery shop without shoes, covered in blood, after fleeing his property, where he was violently attacked by three masked men. We go to meet him; two other units are dispatched to the flat to find the attackers. The dead body will have to wait.
When we arrive, I instantly see him: a forty-something balding man in a yellow t-shirt with his stomach covered in blood, bleeding cuts on his wrists, black socks, pyjama trousers, unkempt hair, and the unfocused eyes of someone who’s in shock. He sways slightly, propping himself up near the vegetables, as an officer tries to ensure he doesn’t bleed on the bell peppers.
He tells us that three Black men in balaclavas have broken into his flat and tried to attack him with knives; they smashed up his flat, and broke windows. He was stuck with defensive wounds, barely escaping with his life. Boyce calls an ambulance; Clayton gets the man a bottle of water to help him calm down. The other officers radio in that the flat has been torn apart, with broken glass everywhere, but no sign of any attackers. 
As we wait for an ambulance over the next twenty minutes, Clayton makes tea for the victim in the Tesco employee break room and starts asking a few more questions. The man explains that he was hiding in a locked bathroom during the attack: “That’s when they started crawling up the side of the house and breaking in through all the different windows.” Clayton pauses, then asks how he could see those windows while he was locked in the bathroom. “Well, that was after they were pointing all the guns at me from the bushes,” he says, with no emotion in his voice. 
Clayton reports the claim of a gun to dispatch, as he’s required to do, but it’s like a real-life movie twist; every “fact” is starting to take on new meaning as the man’s claims become more outlandish. A few minutes later, officers at the flat report that the glass was broken outward. And when Boyce looks him up in the system, there’s a history of schizophrenia, including a psychotic episode where he violently attacked his own mother. This time, he’s smashed up his own flat. With no ambulances available, it’s up to Boyce and Clayton to transport him to the hospital in the squad car, where we wait with him in the emergency department for about an hour—a knock-on effect of one overstretched public service compounding the difficulties of another.
Meanwhile, another emergency response unit has to remain at the flat, since the door is destroyed and they’ve discovered a stash of illegal drugs. As we leave, I realize that, yet again, three of Hammersmith’s four emergency response vehicles had been scrambled to a crime that didn’t actually happen. But what happens when you don’t scramble three squad cars to an attempted murder because you think it sounds fishy—and the attack turns out to be real?
(Mental health calls take up considerable resources, but they’re also unpredictable—and sometimes dangerous. For example, PC Allan, whom I spent twelve hours shadowing, told me that he once had to forcefully restrain a mentally unwell man who violently attacked his mother and had started flinging objects at Allan. As Allan tried to restrain him during the attack, the unwell man clawed at Allan’s face, ripping the tear duct in his eye, an excruciating injury that kept him off the streets for several months.)
We eventually leave the unwell man from Tesco in the capable hands of the hospital, climb back in the car, and zip toward the apparent dead body. Nobody has yet responded, as everything was tied up with the phantom attack. When we get there, nitrile gloves on hands, the sixty-something woman who’s apparently dead in her flat unexpectedly answers the door, clad in a bathrobe. It’s filthy inside, and as the officers investigate, we realize—with considerable dark amusement—that a can of decades-old baked beans has exploded in her kitchen, leaving suspicious-looking red slime across the windows and attracting hundreds of happy flies.
Policing, I learned, is often like that: one moment it’s a real dead body, or a horrific act of violence that can traumatize the officers forever; the next moment it’s a comically stashed frying pan and The Case of the Exploding Baked Beans. But even when the body turns out to be beans, I recognized that the bodies of the officers are always coursing with some level of adrenaline, constantly ready to respond to the worst case scenario, never knowing what to expect. The 999 calls are merely short snippets of a perceived reality that sometimes are accurate but often are not. That uncertainty takes a stressful toll—and can also lead to human fallibility.
To counteract the risks of officers making mistakes, or worse, the Met has done what many US police departments have failed to do: institute aggressive oversight. But how do you get the balance right, mitigating police misconduct without hampering cops from being able to do their jobs?
IV: The Watchdogs
On my first ride along, PC Allan was paired with Wiktoria, a smiley, upbeat officer originally from Poland. Both were unfailingly polite, skilful, and professional in every interaction I observed. In one instance, we responded to a domestic abuse call involving a man who had previously violently attacked prison officers while in custody. (Allan’s taser was at the ready.) It turned out the man had already fled, but both officers still had their body cameras on, just in case. Sat in a living room filled with little Mickey Mouse clothes and toys, the officers asked the Mom a prescribed list of questions to assess the threat to her, dictated by a mandated, evidence-based protocol.
Through the first dozen questions, she downplayed the severity of the situation. But when Wiktoria got to a question that asked her “On a scale of 1-10, how likely is it that your partner will seriously injure you in the near future,” she quietly responded: “8.” Without the more formal protocol, I wondered, might some officers have been willing to accept the less serious initial version of events and move on? Instead, Wiktoria asked all the questions. (Roughly a third of Met officers are women, a rate that’s far higher than in the US, where that figure is around 12%. Wiktoria told me it has its challenges, such as the time that she arrested a man for rape, and he hit on her while she put handcuffs on him.)
After we left the domestic, while Allan was almost stationary, a distracted cyclist weaving through traffic scraped the squad car, going about a mile an hour. The cyclist apologised, rightly, but the minor impact—which was imperceptible in the vehicle—triggered a collision light. It was beyond common sense that this was no big deal, but protocol required taking the car out of service and immediately getting a higher-up authority in the police to download the substantial recorded data from the vehicle to ensure that the police had not done anything wrong.
In practice, this required crawling through traffic to a higher-ranked officer who also had to wade through traffic to meet us. The laptop, which looked ancient, downloaded the data like it was stuck on a dial-up modem. In total, that minuscule event knocked an emergency squad car out of service for around two hours—a quarter of their shift—keeping Martin and Wiktoria off the streets while creating a backlog of calls and slower response times.
I’ve written extensively [ https://substack.com/redirect/2edae613-05b1-475b-8731-6afe89ea2658?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] about the value of better oversight in policing. But I also saw how oversight, done overzealously, can do harm.
In another callout, it took us thirty minutes to get through traffic to a report of shoplifting at a grocery store, in which an alcoholic woman had stolen a £20 bottle of vodka and started chugging it on the premises. By the time we arrived, she was long gone. “Took you long enough, broski,” sneered the store assistant when Allan and Wiktoria arrived on scene. “Glad you took your time.”
The reason we didn’t get there faster is simple: the Met has made a risk-reward calculus about fast driving on blue lights and sirens in heavily populated areas. When there’s an ongoing threat, or an immediate emergency, the rewards of rapid response outweigh the risks; when it’s a £20 bottle of vodka at stake, they don’t. That can make the public angry, as with the shop assistant. But he probably didn’t know about Sergeant Tom Upton.
On July 12, 2017, Upton was an emergency response driver in the Met. During that shift, his partner had to forcibly restrain a man who was violently assaulting a woman in an ugly domestic incident outside a school. Oversight protocol required that any officer who used any physical force needed to complete paperwork and provide bodycam footage before returning to duty.
As the partner was filling out forms, the police radio conveyed an emergency: a man had a suspected cardiac arrest, but it was proving impossible to gain entry to his property. His life depended on a quick police response, yet all units were tied up. Twice more, the dispatchers tried, and failed, to find an available emergency car. Finally, on the third attempt, Upton volunteered to go solo, leaving his partner who had to remain at the station until all the i’s were dotted in accordance with standard oversight.
On the way, with blue lights on and sirens blaring, a 71 year-old man started crossing the road, even though there was a red signal to not cross. Upton was driving slowly, going just 23 miles an hour, barely above the speed limit of 20. The man stepped out in front of the car. Upton slammed on the brakes, but it was too late: the car struck him while travelling 13 miles per hour. The elderly man was badly injured. He eventually slipped into a coma.
Upton tried to let his own family know about the tragedy, but officers took his phone away from him as part of the immediate investigation, so he couldn’t tell anyone what was going on or seek support from family or friends. When I interviewed him, he choked up on this part, remembering his emotions of isolation and extreme distress, coupled with learning how his parents waited on a bench outside the station for hours and hours, in anguished uncertainty, but with no further information.
The investigation quickly cleared Upton of wrongdoing. But in March 2018, while Upton was in Salisbury helping local police with the high profile case involving Russia’s Novichok poisoning [ https://substack.com/redirect/4963afd0-8a92-4baf-8668-34dc67aad569?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], he received a phone call. After eight months in a coma, the pedestrian had died, killed while an officer was trying to save another life. This could change things: Upton now faced the specter of being criminally charged. A coroners’ investigation was held in 2019, two years after the tragic accident. Following five days of emotionally excruciating hearings, Upton was again cleared of any wrongdoing.
Then, in 2020, Upton received an e-mail from his solicitor: the family was pursuing civil action in the courts against him personally and against the Met. Two years later, in 2022, formal documents were filed. Finally, in February 2024, a judge ordered the Met to pay around £150,000 to the family, even though he found that the pedestrian had started crossing the road nine seconds after the signal turned red and that everyone could hear the sirens. 
For the majority of the 12 years he served as a police officer, then, Upton didn’t just have to deal with the emotional toll of the accidental death, but also years of uncertainty about whether he could face criminal charges for doing his job. Upton told me that he was diagnosed with PTSD from the incident, experienced panic attacks, lost a relationship, and had his house purchase fall through, all from enduring those seven years of intense stress. It was a tragic, horrifying episode—but there will always be unavoidable risks in rapid emergency response.
Here lies the tricky balancing act: to protect the public from avoidable abuses committed by bad apples in uniform, we clearly need watchdogs with real bite. But sometimes, if they bite the wrong people, or bite too hard for tragic accidents or meaningless transgressions, it can slow down responses, hamper good cops from doing their jobs, expend huge resources on the wrong priorities, and drive public servants off the streets.
Several officers told me the same thing: “I don’t feel protected”; “There’s a constant fear of losing your job for doing your best”; and “The desk jobs start looking better and better by comparison.” There are strong political incentives in Britain for ever-greater oversight of emergency policing, but all oversight isn’t automatically good; smart oversight that protects the public and the officers is the worthwhile goal.
When you Google Tom Upton, there are many articles about that accident. But there are also articles about an incident a year earlier, in 2016, when he saved someone’s life [ https://substack.com/redirect/d44582b0-66c1-41d2-9740-4a0097cb11cb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] while off duty. The rest of his career, the difficult daily emergency responses like the ones I saw from his fellow officers, attracts no coverage, remaining invisible to the public. 
Two weeks ago, Upton took a career break from the Metropolitan Police, leaving him more free to speak. “I sometimes feel broken,” he tells me, “from compassion fatigue,” a psychological state of exhaustion that arises from prolonged exposure to the trauma of others. He tells me about one day when he struggled to cope after responding to a grisly suicide in which he had to try to find that person’s detached arm, which was severed by their fall from height. “The scene was horrific,” he tells me. “But how do you try to explain something like that to family or on dates?”
On my final ride along shift, as we park back at Hammersmith Station, two young women in uniform walk past the car I’m in with Boyce and Clayton. These officers are carrying a blood-stained tarpaulin that they’re taking to be cleaned. They had responded to the suicide that I’d heard discussed over police radio earlier on in the shift, a person who jumped from height. “It was grim,” they tell Boyce. “He swan dived—so the head wasn’t….” 
Mid-sentence, they spot me—and freeze—worried that they overshared, that such details would horrify an outsider who doesn’t get it. Boyce assures them they can talk freely. But in that moment, where their social bubble is accidentally pierced, I come to viscerally appreciate that there’s an entire slice of the population in harrowing professions, from paramedics to police, who go to work, routinely encounter horrific snapshots of human misery, and then try to compartmentalize it when they go home to their families or pick up food from the shops.
I say goodbye, the officers from the next shift drive away on blue lights, and the young women carry off the stained tarp.
Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. This edition was free, but as you might imagine, this took a fair bit of work, so if you want to support my writing so I can keep at it, please consider upgrading to a paid subscription to keep it sustainable. It costs just $5/month or $50/year.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.Mcbg3uh784VjvrZblNhlTNZHFnkchSOqiI8dorrz0e4?