Hello Ishan,

Every startup begins with a dream.

Some dreams are big and ambitious—"Ding in the universe" type of dreams.

Others are modest and realistic—"US$5,000 monthly revenue" type of dreams.

We fell somewhere in the middle when we began The Ken four years ago, in October 2016.

On one hand, we wanted to build a sustainable business with a steady and predictable revenue stream. That was one reason why we chose subscriptions instead of depending on the largesse of advertisers and sponsors.

But on the other hand, we truly wanted to build a media company that was impactful at scale. One that would provide an unbiased, informed, and honest view without fear or favour. That was a rarity in the Indian media landscape then, and sadly, all the more so today.

Fast forward four years and we’ve crossed tens of thousands of subscribers who have given us millions of dollars of subscription revenue. Tempting as it is for us to think that we’ve made it, in a sense, we need to start all over again, as Seema will explain.

Sumanth Raghavendra

Co-founder

The Ken is still a tiny publication, perhaps reaching only a certain kind of reader.

Yet, we like to think of ourselves as an early information system for the new economy businesses we write about. 

Like fungi.

Allow me to use an analogy from biologist-brewer Merlin Sheldrake’s dazzling book on fungi—Entangled Life: How Fungi Make Our Worlds, Change Our Minds & Shape Our Futures. 

Mushrooms or yeast may be the common fungi that come to most minds. In nature, these organisms make up an incredibly diverse world of organisms and sustain virtually all living systems. You’ll find them sprawling for miles underground or linking plants together in complex networks known as WWW (Wood Wide Web).

Along with nutrients, says Sheldrake, fungi distribute information across plants. 

For example, if there’s an aphid attack on a plant, it emits a “chemical shriek” that can be “heard” by other plants in the vast fungal network. This allows the networked plants to prepare by emitting a chemical that will beckon wasps, which will then eat aphids. Even if the “shrieking” plant derives no benefit, the fungal network benefits by keeping the rest of the plants safe. 

Quality journalism is like the fungal information system. Its “shrieks” keep societies alive and healthy, now needed more than ever.

The embarrassing inadequacy of a large section of mainstream media today is worse than an aphid attack. 

What we have in the name of journalism is a propaganda machine; hostage to half-truths and lies. Anyone with any clout can get anything published in the most mainstream of publications. Once published, if you don’t like your own quote, no worries, it can be edited, even deleted. If the headline bothers you, no problem. The online edition will display what you approve of. You want an interview published? Send in your questions and answers; the Q&A will go as-is.

That’s made-to-order journalism. It’s like junk food for the brain, one consumes it at

one’s own peril. 

Thankfully, a whole host of new, independent, entrepreneurial journalism entities

have taken roots in India. May their tribe grow. May their subscribers grow. May their networks grow. 

But may their principles stay the same.

Because we need unwavering principles and scale to make quality journalism sustainable, as Rohin ends with.

Seema Singh

Editor & Co-founder

I am subscriber number one at The Ken because I got the chance to buy the first subscription we sold. I’ve since renewed it four times, like so many other subscribers from our original launch cohort.

I’m not alone. Every single person at The Ken has paid for their own subscription too. Because we decided early on that principles mattered.

We couldn’t ask subscribers to pay for and experience our journalism if we didn’t ourselves.

Being subscriber-funded has allowed us to stick with our principles, even in the face of short-term opportunity losses. Because every subscriber who signs up is really paying us in advance for 12-36 months to stick to our principles.

“Here’s my money. Don’t change what you do or who you are. Don’t let me down.”

Though we’re a small team of just 35 people, God knows we try hard. Which is how we went from just one country, one daily story, and a few hundred subscribers to six countries, multiple subscription products, and over 25,000 subscribers.

The Ken is today both an Indian and Southeast Asian publication. We see a clear and long-term opportunity to build an Asian business publication built ground-up for subscribers. One that reports from and writes for Asia first and foremost.

One that wants to create an Asian equal, one day, to respected publications like The Wall Street Journal (founded in 1889) and Financial Times (founded in 1888). This means aiming to grow our subscribers from 25,000 to 100,000 over the next few years, and then aim for one million. This means building something that can be around 100 years from now.

Quixotic as that may sound, we’re willing to let our journalism do the talking for us, with your help. In October, we want to put the best of our journalism before 100,000 new users. 

You will be key to this. 

Rohin Dharmakumar

CEO and Co-founder

PS:

There's no better way to spend our fourth anniversary than hearing from our readers. Do reply to this email and tell us how your experience with The Ken has been. What you loved and what you didn't. We promise we'll read all your emails!

You received this email on The Ken's anniversary because you're subscribed to The Ken with ishan.mail@gmail.com

If you don't want to receive our emails, set your preferences here https://the-ken.com/newsletters/?utm_source=an_ftr&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=anvsry_ancmt. To unsubscribe, click here https://link.the-ken.com/asm/unsubscribe/?user_id=2349339&data=0kYykyF_TA2hwD1D5QzH5YfieY4AjI3-iOXTnUzzeYCgoHvv8sJiw-veLizzWEigMPKbD2XCE1TrxHp0X3f38PASr4SnDhcTtuxyTSr5JqH-tv-sqcdecp5vKJ_gZhvjBhBQ4Prs3cndDPZTmxCNj1OtytVo_yjgDhjQvgq0lhmsPH07zonrhwIXvTrxrMsslUT2KV6OaLgWgoz5KFxLHZf8rpNcjcOAU-n20UsI5Tg6XpPc_-qKi3XIH2VtTFY4cAZZQEHckqs67sbuxzDEnEiNsBLpEhAnR14b1ahx4amCiSv5uGFJxP9EwZUgMdFtmF6Rdqeogj_cdpDY4QD57AJH_AzWGpyTfV3HNPyU71gXT64hlg70BuMRQ3G4vGWmbxR95Gbw2Wp8pn3ME8e9UuACrgMN0sHNeA9vSqgO3KPyLpLzhERoPN2NrkasNM2oXGstEzc-m1CSvq2DFbuuU72CgQYEm5eqYgmCI3MR0xhCCHxBYUO5k_KrhBTI4wK7Q4J17g3x-YuexydA7pxatXlRMdJ5UKZe-V51zbXc2qcIv-QziUOizvx-jw5QbAcyEi3JHElulm-nKEULR_fdmQ==

© 2020  The Ken