View this post on the web at https://www.forkingpaths.co/p/why-dont-politicians-have-a-vision

Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. This edition is free for everyone, but if you’d like to support my work and keep my writing sustainable, please consider upgrading to a paid subscription for just $5/month or $50/year (which works out to about one coffee per month). Paid subscribers also get full access to the entire archive [ https://substack.com/redirect/05a6eab8-4be6-4955-a9b8-10bfd1ea5843?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] of over 225+ essays.
I: The Conspicuous Absence
Politicians across the world don’t have a clue what to do about artificial intelligence. Many of them barely understand the basics of AI—thinking that the internet is just a series of tubes [ https://substack.com/redirect/19fa8dce-5368-4c3d-967e-a00703fea2f5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] and that AI is just a string of helpful words on ChatGPT. They therefore don’t grasp that we’re living in a historic fulcrum moment, where our choices may be species-defining.
But there’s a more puzzling dynamic: nobody in political leadership seems to want to even try to articulate a bold vision for what comes next or what a good outcome for humanity might look like in a post-AI world. Instead, we’re stuck inside a real-life theater of the absurd; there’s a universal, creeping sense of dread about a seemingly unstoppable technological force that’s simultaneously miraculous and terrifying, while politicians launch avoidable wars and fixate on how to chuck out the migrants.
Look around and you’ll notice a conspicuous absence. Who’s going to deliver a global Apollo-style speech for AI—the one that rallies us toward a hard-fought utopia rather than a looming, inevitable dystopia? Keir Starmer? Chuck Schumer? Donald Trump?
Here’s a selection of Trump’s remarks at a major AI summit last year:
“Everyone is talking about artificial intelligence. I find that too artificial. I can't stand it. I don't even like the name. I don't like anything that's artificial, so could we straighten that out, please? We should change the name…This is really something that nobody expected. It just popped out of the air and here we are. But we will defend our nation, our values, our future, and our freedom and it will be really great. But what we really need to be successful is a very simple phrase called common sense.”
It’s not just that we don’t have the right people to meet the moment. Our era is defined by a depressing Politics of Damage Limitation, a sort of managed pessimism that, at best, puts out fires rather than igniting transformative change.
It’s obvious that AI is going to change everything, but politicians are articulating an around-the-edges strategy of incremental management that looks at AI as its own separate realm, merely a new front in an old geopolitical battle for economic dominance. Yet, as I wrote previously [ https://substack.com/redirect/c19f90f8-a8a1-40f4-a665-2ba990c4649d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], the question AI poses for our species is far more profound:
Every piece of technology can either make us more human or less human. It can liberate us from the mundane to unleash creativity and connection, or it can shackle us to mindless robotic drudgery of isolated meaninglessness.
Contrary to popular opinion, the latter option is not inevitable. We get to choose whether—and how—we adopt technology that can eviscerate our humanity.
But the question is this: who is going to make that choice?
While politicians bicker over culture wars and jockey for electoral position, there are many people contemplating—and planning for—an AI-driven future. They’re predominantly led by grotesquely rich men in Silicon Valley, amoral tech bros with private jets and messiah complexes. They have an unhealthy obsession with immortality and colonizing other planets rather than saving our own. And above all, many are united by an assured unreflective certainty that if you can do something, you should. 
We live in an era that feels like we are merely members of the audience while the billionaire barons announce the future to us lowly peasants—who should be grateful for their kindly overlords. But these aren’t technical engineering problems, like how to build a better rocket ship. They’re value-based judgments about the future of our species. And we’re ceding them to the unelected oligarchs of Silicon Valley.
These are the people who dabble gleefully with monstrous social concepts such as the “permanent underclass [ https://substack.com/redirect/f7084cb1-ed2d-4ff1-a878-15ba4d74455c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ],” in which they race to get ahead, hoovering up money and power before artificial intelligence freezes social mobility and forces the have-nots into permanent subservience to the have-yachts.
In short, the powerful people leading the AI revolution are often the wrong kind of people, while the powerful people in government leadership who could keep human society off the digital guillotine don’t know much about AI.
And yet, carefully managing the AI transformation while minimizing catastrophic risk and human misery will be the defining political challenge of our generation. Done right, technological innovation could unleash fresh and unprecedented prosperity; done wrong, it could doom us all [ https://substack.com/redirect/86a670cc-f780-435f-9cfc-7e37bfac7ed5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
The world is crying out for a bold vision—and instead we get the “National AI Legislative Framework [ https://substack.com/redirect/d68475e7-2f1f-4545-a50e-6eeea8d4695b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]” and the “AI Opportunities Action Plan [ https://substack.com/redirect/433a2ad7-ad54-4904-9412-e639353370a7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].” 
II: The Lost Art of the Ideal
When was the last time you pondered what utopia would look like to you?
I don’t mean that in some vague sense. I mean truly imagined it—conjuring up a mental image of what kind of society you would create, SimCity style, if only you could reshape modern life to your whims. What would perfection look like?
Now, consider this: when’s the last time you switched on the TV or the radio and heard a politician discussing, in broad value-based terms, the question: “What would an ideal society be like?” 
That question is the question for humanity. We almost never discuss it. Instead, the goals we chase in news bulletins are mostly about modest reductions in inflation; ending a war that was started by choice; clearing public service backlogs and making housing marginally more affordable. It creates a sort of learned powerlessness, in which real imagination is radical. 
The grammar of modern political communication is reactionary, often punctuated by managed disappointment and feasibility ceilings. But how can we build a better society if the only options we ever consider are those that are already considered realistic right now?
The historian Felipe Fernández-Armesto writes that “ideas are the main motors of change in human cultures.” Most animals are unable to imagine radically different possible futures. We are, in that way, unique, with a cognitive superpower that has driven us toward dazzling innovation and human prosperity. (Despite real threats, the world is not as bad as you think [ https://substack.com/redirect/4ad6cb24-d89e-4196-b2e7-a248a39d9b46?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].)
But to build a better society, we need two kinds of parallel thinking:
What kind of society do we want?
Given the constraints we face, how can we move society toward that ideal?
To put it differently, you need both the politics of the ideal and the politics of the possible. The former allows you to decide on your destination. The latter is like Google Maps, offering the path of least resistance to get there. But in modern life, we’ve grown so jaded, so cynical about what can be achieved, that we’ve effectively eliminated serious discussions around the politics of the ideal. That’s terrible timing, because artificial intelligence is going to change our world—and we could harness that change to unleash a better kind of world. But if we’re passive or unambitious with our thinking, our world will change in terrible, possibly catastrophic ways.
Burying our heads in the sand isn’t an option. The risk of doing nothing is obvious: a decimated labor market overseen by a tech aristocracy on top.
For those of us who live in democracies, this is an utterly bizarre state of affairs. We’re supposed to build a society that we choose, not just accept that which arrives out of the technological ether, as though we’re powerless witnesses to the history we’re supposed to write ourselves.
III: Why Have Politicians Failed to Meet the Moment?
Nearly a century ago, in 1930, the economist John Maynard Keynes wrote an essay titled “Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren.” Shortly after the onset of economic collapse in 1929, Keynes saw the long-term economic future as one of optimism, albeit punctuated by temporary dislocation:
“We are suffering, not from the rheumatics of old age, but from the growing-pains of over-rapid changes, from the painfulness of readjustment between one economic period and another. The increase of technical efficiency has been taking place faster than we can deal with the problem of labour absorption…But this is only a temporary phase of maladjustment. All this means in the long run that mankind is solving its economic problem. I would predict that the standard of life in progressive countries one hundred years hence will be between four and eight times as high as it is to-day.”
Keynes imagined 15 hour work weeks and an unexpected challenge: figuring out what to do with all that leisure time. (Sound familiar as a predicted future?)
Now, just shy of 100 years later, his prediction has been a mixed bag. His optimism was catastrophically misplaced in the short-term, as the world descended into the bloodiest war in human history less than a decade later. 
However, for those who have tried to measure standard of living, he was broadly right about how much it has improved in a century. There are indeed wide gulfs between the rich and poor, but even the poor in Western democracies have comforts that were reserved for the rich in the early 20th century. And yet, rather than 15 hour work weeks, the new norm has become two earners working 40+ hours a week. Most people feel run down, burnt out, craving leisure time rather than drowning in it—and sparing quite a lot of what they do have on mindless digital tedium. As I wrote in Fluke [ https://substack.com/redirect/a1348dbc-18d7-46be-aaf4-acbb13360ee3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]:
“This is the paradox of twenty-first-century life: staggering prosperity seems to be tethered to surging rates of alienation, despair, and existential precariousness. Humans have constructed the most sophisticated civilizations ever to grace the planet, but countless millions need to medicate themselves to cope with living within them.”
What Keynes had in spades, though, was ambition of vision. In a moment of crisis and change, he saw opportunity. The same was true of the British economist William Beveridge. As bombs were falling on London and the British state faced a truly existential risk from Nazi Germany, the government set up a committee to develop a plan for the social safety net, ready to put in place when peace returned.
The Beveridge Report laid out an ambitious vision for a state that could take care of its own people, come what may. Sir Kingsley Wood, the government’s money man, tried to block its publication, saying it was “an impracticable financial commitment.” It was published anyway. In 1945, it became the basis of government policy—and formed the post-war social welfare state. Despite opposition, it was also an important document during the war, highlighting a vision of a society that was worth fighting for in the first place.
But perhaps the most iconic example of a politician understanding the scale of a challenge—and responding with bold ambition—was John F. Kennedy’s “We Choose to Go to the Moon” speech [ https://substack.com/redirect/e989167b-dba9-409e-bbf1-a574144c5bf9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] in September 1962. It’s a speech of rhetorical beauty, radical imagination, and sweeping scope. JFK also understood the necessity of harnessing technology rather than letting it evolve unmanaged through profit motive or pure geopolitical malevolence: “For space science, like nuclear science and all technology, has no conscience of its own. Whether it will become a force for good or ill depends on man.” 
Each example shows a moment of crisis followed by a rallying call for radical improvements, the pie-in-the-sky kind of thinking that inspires first, organizes second. And in any moment crying out for intrepid social redesign, like our current one, there will be a first mover prize: the person or movement that initially captures the public’s imagination will shape the debate for years, even decades to come. 
So, why aren’t any politicians effectively seizing that advantage?
First, we live in an era with a plentiful supply of political risk aversion, in which the Politics of Protection readily triumphs over a Politics of Transformation. Politicians instinctively know that the voter who fears losing his or her job is a more reliable voter than one who dreams of a possible utopian future. To win votes, the politics of loss aversion is normally a relatively safe bet.
And yet, the old strategies are getting tired. Electoral shocks, whether from populist insurgents or burn-it-all-down revolutionaries on the left and right, suggest that people intuitively understand that we’re in a moment of unsustainable economic and political precarity. It’s abundantly clear that Chuck Schumer-style old school politics, of reactive press releases and focus group tested slogans, isn’t going to cut it.
Second, the failure to meet the moment comes from the lack of an obvious constituency. Lobbyists are raking in cash from AI-adjacent interests, but aside from those companies, preserving what makes us human doesn’t yield a clear-cut political coalition. The self-anointed tech bros may be fighting the AI safety doomsayers but the bros have money and the AI safety think tanks aren’t a voting bloc. Many of the people who are about to be decimated by AI don’t know they’re going to be decimated; and many more of us who may despise an AI-driven society without guardrails have an amorphous sense of dread, not a targeted focal point for policy intervention. 
Third, there’s the issue of speed. Technology often moves fast but AI is sprinting. Politicians move slowly. Policy reviews and commissions take years. With artificial intelligence, the investigations and reports are outdated even before being posted online, never to be read by anyone.
Consider the governance response to social media. There are debates about online safety bills to restrain social media companies now for a technology that is more than two decades old. But if governments wait even a few years to get to grips with artificial intelligence, it’ll be too late—the genie will be out of the bottle and it’ll be much harder to retroactively decide whose wishes it will grant.
Fourth, artificial intelligence is normatively polarizing, which is wholly unlike other catastrophic risks. Nuclear weapons have uniformly negative destructive power; they don’t simultaneously destroy cities and potentially cure cancer. Few think climate change has hidden upside.
But with artificial intelligence, some of the technological advancements it promises could unleash some of the greatest improvements in human flourishing ever. There will be biomedical innovations that prolong lives, supercharged productivity and efficiency gains, ideational acceleration that could make mincemeat of historically stubborn social scourges. If the economic gains are captured and fairly distributed rather than simply accruing to the techno-corporate elite, Keynes’s vision of a broad-based leisure class isn’t unrealistic—and humans could focus on that which makes our species truly special rather than toiling in the meaningless digital drudgery of what David Graeber called “Bullshit Jobs.” 
On the other hand, artificial intelligence could wipe out our species—as we are the first living organism on planet Earth with the capacity to make itself extinct.
This thorny complexity has solidified paralysis, as modern politics has morphed into a stale battle of simple up-or-down judgments. We even have digital buttons constantly used in daily life for this absurdly reductive view of the world. This dynamic also extends to cultural production, where viewers watch singing competitions and vote thumbs up or down. In that dumbed-down environment, which modern politicians have fostered, it’s harder to present a vision about artificial intelligence that isn’t simply for or against the technology, but instead presents a more nuanced view of a possible pro-human way forward.
I fear, then, that the most likely short-term future will be defined by further accumulation of power, money, and decision-making for the tech titan oligarchs of Silicon Valley followed by an unexpected AI-induced economic catastrophe that serves as a tragically necessary wake up call.
That catastrophe could be as banal as mass white collar job loss or a flash market crash triggered by AI trading cascades. Or, it could be a more devastating shock caused by the development of a new bioweapon designed by artificial intelligence or a cyber Pearl Harbor moment that reveals how much our world relies on vulnerable digital infrastructure. 
These precursor events to the larger challenges posed by AI would force political action—and could push us closer toward a bolder vision. But with our current political dynamics, there’s every reason to believe that the response would still be to turn toward reactionary blame games. And if responsible politicians don’t seize the moment now, there will certainly be anti-AI populists waiting in the wings, who, like most populists, will seek to burn it all down without any plan for rebuilding from the ashes.
There is a better way: a wise politician could seize the moment and articulate a radically different future that aims to harness AI through profound social and economic transformation but with hard-hitting global policies to contain its catastrophic and existential risks. It would be a political gamble. But it’s worth remembering that every transformative social vision that came to fruition also looked absurd and fanciful when it was initially proposed.
Beveridge called for an extreme expansion of government spending on the social safety net—in a bomb-devastated country that was running out of money, the same month as British troops fought for their nation’s survival on the desert sands of El Alamein. The EU was born out of an economic organization that proposed unprecedented economic integration between countries that had just spent five years massacring each other. And while the Soviet Union threatened to evaporate American cities, Kennedy rallied a country behind technology that did not yet exist, all because humanity’s moonshot was sufficiently inspiring to organize collective ingenuity to reach previously unimagined heights.
Humans have a terrible capacity for passive indifference when suffering is contained geographically or risks are uncertain and lie in the future. But we also have the potential to imagine possible futures and build them. Our future will inevitably be different because of artificial intelligence. The powerful genie is escaping from the bottle. It’s time for politicians to better articulate what we might wish for—and then it’s up to us to demand that it comes true.
Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. This edition was free for everyone, but if you’d like to keep this publication sustainable (and want me to be paid for my work) please consider upgrading to a paid subscription for just $50/year or $5/month. Paid subscribers get full access to the archive [ https://substack.com/redirect/05a6eab8-4be6-4955-a9b8-10bfd1ea5843?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] of 225+ essays and receive essays not available to free subscribers. (And for what it’s worth, I never write with AI.)

Unsubscribe https://substack.com/redirect/2/eyJlIjoiaHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZm9ya2luZ3BhdGhzLmNvL2FjdGlvbi9kaXNhYmxlX2VtYWlsP3Rva2VuPWV5SjFjMlZ5WDJsa0lqb3hORFUyTXpNeE9Td2ljRzl6ZEY5cFpDSTZNVGsyT1RRNE56ZzJMQ0pwWVhRaU9qRTNOemcxT0RJeE1EVXNJbVY0Y0NJNk1UZ3hNREV4T0RFd05Td2lhWE56SWpvaWNIVmlMVEV4T0RRMU16QWlMQ0p6ZFdJaU9pSmthWE5oWW14bFgyVnRZV2xzSW4wLlJFNjhFNklaU1FzQzFPVzlua3Vob25SVVdWdG9rX19lajl4RmJTVVVIRW8iLCJwIjoxOTY5NDg3ODYsInMiOjExODQ1MzAsImYiOnRydWUsInUiOjE0NTYzMzE5LCJpYXQiOjE3Nzg1ODIxMDUsImV4cCI6MjA5NDE1ODEwNSwiaXNzIjoicHViLTAiLCJzdWIiOiJsaW5rLXJlZGlyZWN0In0.PSE4-8WPqoX941qyDKFRA-3PMzBbrfPhPXGE_1Zopb8?