View this post on the web at https://www.forkingpaths.co/p/can-a-horse-frown

Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. If you’d like to support my work, get access to paywalled articles, and peruse the full archive of 225+ essays, you can upgrade for $5 per month or $50 for a full year.
In the early 1800s, the Scottish anatomist Charles Bell argued that facial expressions were uniquely human. The smile, the frown, the grimace were each forged by God, bestowed on us through a complex array of tiny invisible muscles giving us unrivalled capabilities at emotional, moral, and spiritual expression. Through our faces, Bell argued, humans bared their souls for all to see—something a lesser animal without our divine spark could never hope to achieve.
His logical proof was simple: if God had wanted non-human animals to reveal their inner souls, he would have given them facial muscles like ours. 
Bell’s argument had a small flaw: he was completely wrong. 
As Charles Darwin argued later in the 19th century—and has since been proven through comparative anatomical dissections—our facial muscles are part of a shared heritage with other mammals. If God wanted us to have unique facial expressions through sophisticated musculature, he generously gave something similar to plenty of our animal relatives, including many distant cousins.
It’s less of a surprise, perhaps, that chimpanzees have the same number of facial muscles—24—that we do. But there’s considerable overlap with other mammals that seem completely unlike us, too, such that 54% of horse facial expressions overlap with humans. Cats, modern boffiins reliably inform us [ https://substack.com/redirect/3f6c9694-3223-415a-b36d-34ff81eeaa31?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], can produce 276 distinct facial expressions. (Chimps narrowly edge them out by the numbers, with 357 of their own.)
By contrast, no matter what elation or displeasure they may or may not internally feel, ants, sharks, and snakes cannot smile nor pout.
Our facial muscles are therefore a clear vestige of a shared ancestry with many of those in our class, Mammalia, suggesting that—as Darwin argued in his 1872 work The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals—our scowls and smirks are evidence of a common evolutionary past.
Bell was thus clearly wrong: similar facial muscles exist across countless mammal species. Yet, that revelation only raises three more profound puzzles:
Can dogs and horses actually frown, or just move their mouths in ways that look like frowns? Is a smiling chimp happy?
Why do (animal) facial expressions exist?
Why do we have them when most other non-mammals don’t?
To understand the answers to these questions, we need to explore some unexpected intellectual terrain, ranging from why domesticated dogs have evolved specialized eye muscles that wolves lack; to figuring out whether a horse can easily differentiate between a happy-faced horse and an angry-faced one; and finally exploring the depth of facial expression control by testing whether a cuttlefish can pass the delayed gratification marshmallow test.
You’ll never look at a smile or a blushed cheek quite the same way again.
I: AU101: The Dog’s Secret Weapon 
It’s simple to anecdotally observe a chimp appearing to laugh or a horse looking a bit mischievous; it’s far harder to create a scientific metric to systematically study animal facial expressions. 
Bertrand Russell once quipped that “Work is of two kinds: first, altering the position of matter at or near the earth’s surface relatively to other such matter; second, telling other people to do so.” What Russell may not have accounted for was the small group of humans who wake up and make neither widgets nor oversee spreadsheets, but instead rise and shine, then carefully film the facial expressions of horses or macaques.
That academic work is based on the human-specific methodology known as the Facial Action Coding System [ https://substack.com/redirect/d2e05e9a-b109-44cd-acfd-da0189d2f34f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], a 1970s model aimed at creating a typology of human facial movements. (These studies led to more rigorous differentiation between seemingly similar expressions, including a clear divide between the insincere “Pan-Am smile” that doesn’t invoke the eye muscles compared to the “Duchenne smile” that does.) 
To create comparisons between human facial expressions and those of other animals, there are now several additional coding systems: MaqFACS (for macaques); OrangFACS (for orang-utans); ChimpFACS; EquiFACS (for horses); CatFACS; and DogFACS. This has allowed researchers to create scientifically valid comparisons across species and speak a universal language about facial movements through what are known as “Action Units.” (Rather than saying that a person or a macaque is “smiling,” the system allows researchers to describe how their specific facial muscles are contracting—or not.)
Everyone who has ever interacted with a dog has unknowingly encountered a facial expression known to science as “AU101: the “Inner Brow Raiser.” That language, were we to translate such esoteric academic jargon into normal speech, would refer to puppy dog eyes.
In 2019, however, researchers made an unexpected breakthrough by dissecting post-mortem dogs and wolves (none were harmed in the research). What they discovered was that wolves, unlike dogs, refrain from making the AU101 face because it’s literally impossible. Wolves lack a muscle known as the “levator anguli oculi medialis.” Dogs, by contrast, not only have—but routinely and eagerly exploit—this facial muscle. 
Previous research has also shown that dogs, unlike wolves, make eye contact with humans when they’re trying, but failing, to solve a problem. Similarly, studies have shown that eye contact between humans and dogs releases oxytocin [ https://substack.com/redirect/288c36dc-a304-45cf-ae28-606fef475fb9?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], a hormone that’s crucial for social bonding and that’s tied to the nurturing mother/infant connection. 
This has led to evidence-based hypotheses that the rapid shifts in facial musculature for domesticated dogs (since around 33,000 years ago) were driven by feedback loops in their interactions with humans. 
Over time, dogs that had more human-like expressions and could socially bond with us became more likely to survive as they were advantaged for food and protection compared to those that appeared less expressive, more predatory, and more wolf-like. The canine survival strategy morphed from that of wolves (agnostic or avoidant toward human interactions) to that of domesticated dependents (in which human reactions were inextricably linked to survival and reproductive fitness).
Recent evidence seems to confirm this hypothesis. First, dogs have been shown to move their faces in adorable ways, like AU101, far more often when humans are around compared to when they’re not—an example of something known as an “audience effect.” Second, and even more intriguingly, the kinds of dog face muscles have morphed through evolution toward human-like fast-twitch muscle fibers [ https://substack.com/redirect/6102b675-9f98-4a04-b359-94b004368063?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] that allow much more rapid and nuanced social communication. Wolves, by contrast, have significantly more slow-twitch muscle fibers in their faces, as is shown by the diagram below. (The greater the number of fast-twitch muscle fibers, the greater the immediate and nuanced variation in facial expressions—which amplifies their effectiveness as a social cue that can be easily interpreted by humans.)
This research points to a crucial revelation in the study of facial expressions: they evolve over time to achieve social goals that increase evolutionary fitness—by somehow making the animal more likely to survive. And because humans are descended from other species that also make facial expressions, we would be wise to engage with animal faces to better understand their origins—and why we can smile.
II: The Perils of “Stork Face”
Before Darwin’s landmark work on expression, however, facial markers were not viewed through the prism of achieving social goals or any sort of evolved expression. Instead, they were merely external manifestations of unchanging internal qualities. In other words, the face revealed the person within. In Bell’s parlance, that was the soul; for others it was about providing an infallible window into the personality traits a person held, for better or worse.
This led to a bizarre pseudoscience—a precursor adjacent to eugenics—known as physiognomy, the notion that one can read the innate virtues or vices from a person’s facial features. This belief dates to ancient times, from the Zhou Dynasty in ancient China to Aristotle, who claimed to be able to “infer character from features.” (A physiognomist once accused Socrates [ https://substack.com/redirect/01228f2a-95a4-4ce4-8fa0-5bafc4013647?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] of having a face that “indicated brutality and an excessive love for women.”) But even in ancient times, there was a nod to animals: a piggish nose meant stupidity; rough hair akin to a lion’s or boars was a surefire signal of courage. Later, medieval astrologers who dabbled in the occult even saw fate written into facial expressions.
By 1852, the idea that one could read people through their similarity to certain animals had gained widespread currency. Illustrated books [ https://substack.com/redirect/4b29363b-561a-4390-971e-84250338b33d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] provided useful guides to separate courage from corruption, as seen below. One who resembles a stork, for example, may be a bastion of routine and regularity, but inevitably is “deficient in courage.”
A decade earlier, Charles Darwin, ever the working scientist, had already begun taking a deeper interest in facial expressions when he became a father. Darwin recorded how he “deliberately startled [ https://substack.com/redirect/c7b2b129-5f29-44b0-b22a-76d8e47b6e83?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] his 4-month-old son, provoking piercing squalls from the baby and probably a baleful glare from his wife. Then he did it again.” Like those before him, he saw value in looking at the faces of animals as data for humans. But unlike those who came before him, Darwin saw us as descended from those animals. 
Animal faces were therefore a signal of continuity, further proof that we are merely seemingly civilized beasts—albeit more hairless and intelligent than many of our closest forebears. As part of his data collection, Darwin experimented on his young eldest son, Willy, and compared his reactions to those of animals he simultaneously observed. When Willy was first given a mirror, he pressed his face against the glass, peering ever-closer into his reflection. “Very like Ouran Outang” [sic], Darwin recorded, noting the comparison with Jenny, an orangutan he had been regularly observing at London Zoo.
But Darwin wanted to go further, wading into dangerous territory (for his time) that put humans straight into the animal kingdom, stripping our species of its uniqueness. If we were simply an evolutionary offshoot, what would that mean for those who believed we had been perfectly crafted and fully-formed from the beginning, the byproduct of a singular divine spark?
Darwin finally dove into the danger, publishing The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals in 1872. Central to his research were questions about the universality of facial expressions: do people in China smile and cry the same way as those in Britain? Do babies learn facial expressions culturally, or are they hard-wired into our faces as physical architecture? He sent out surveys, charged friends with collecting data on their travels, and wrote to the local zookeeper [ https://substack.com/redirect/0a1f4a38-d0f7-44b8-b987-6acec3ad82e4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], imploring him to study the screams of spider monkeys: “Does it wrinkle up the skin round the eyes like a Baby always does? . . Could you make it scream without hurting it much?”
Some of Darwin’s data collection ended in disappointment. He wrote to a photographer in 1870: “I have been trying to get a [photograph] of a young baby screaming or crying badly; but I fear he will not succeed.”
And all along, Darwin continued to note the similarities between animal and human faces, including the capacity to take joy in the small pleasures of life. · “Dogs and cats manifestly take pleasure in rubbing against their masters and mistresses, and in being rubbed or patted by them. Many kinds of monkeys, as I am assured by the keepers in the Zoological Gardens, delight in fondling and being fondled by each other, and by persons to whom they are attached.” 
He then goes onto remark on the complex range of volatile emotions in animals. “The Anubis baboon was first insulted and put into a furious rage,” Darwin wrote, “as was easily done, by his keeper, who then made friends with him and shook hands” (And then gets caressed and smiles).”
Darwin’s work provoked an intellectual breakthrough that is only now being fully unpacked more than a century and a half later: the ways in which facial expressions may have evolved to achieve social goals.
III: Signalling and the Social Complexity Hypothesis
Social lives, animal and human alike, are defined by signalling. Colorful stripes on a frog can signal deadly toxins to a would-be predator; peacocks signal their suitability as a mate through elaborate tails; MAGA hats signal membership of a political movement. Signalling can therefore act as a social lubricant that helps quickly convey crucial information to guide decision-making, avoid unnecessary conflict, and spur necessary cooperation. And as social interactions become more complex in any given species, the higher the value of signalling to create more efficient social information sharing.
This framework has given rise to the social complexity hypothesis for facial expressions, which suggests that facial complexity is tied to the depth and nuance of social interactions within a species. In other words, the more complex the social interactions, the more important it becomes to provide accurate, quick signals through facial musculature. And this makes intuitive sense: we rely on facial expressions to infer intent constantly, crossing the street to avoid someone who is visibly angry or unwell, consoling someone who’s crying, chatting to someone who smiles at us first.
The same seems to hold true for other social species: dogs, horses, and many primates have complex social lives and have the capability of making diverse facial expressions. A 2024 study [ https://substack.com/redirect/d42d24db-606f-4a3c-9779-ccd746d6c95d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] found that “more facially expressive dominant male macaques were more socially connected and had more cohesive social groups” than those with less expressive faces.
However, there are important—and perplexing—counterexamples. Ants and wasps cannot smile, but they nonetheless produce intricate, complex social interactions on vast scales (using chemicals rather than faces to coordinate). This suggests that mammals solved the signalling problem through facial expressions, while other species that live in complex social environments simply developed alternative methods of communication. 
Moreover, there’s the thorny problem of dishonest signalling. Humans can convincingly fake most facial expressions. (There may be one exception, which is blushing—in which physical, involuntary changes occur. As some researchers rightly note [ https://substack.com/redirect/e46f3aa0-087b-4af6-8a0a-454db2382ece?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: ““An actor may simulate a smile, laughter or a frown, but not a blush!”) 
Obviously, the value of social signalling through facial expressions may decrease if we can’t be sure that it’s authentic; but that then raises an impossibly difficult, but fascinating question: 
Can other animals fake smiles, too?
IV: A Wink, a Twitch, and Horse Facial Recognition
Psychologists and ethologists who study the behaviour of non-human animals have no problem studying the movements of faces—or the physical manifestations of their emotions through behavior. What’s far harder—and may be impossible—is to accurately connect those expressions to the internal sensations that are subjectively experienced by the individual making that facial expressions. In humans, this problem was well-defined by the anthropologist Clifford Geertz, who pointed out that cultural nuance was required to determine whether a similar movement of one eye was a wink or a twitch; the movement may be identical but social context determines our interpretation of it.
This is why most researchers separate between feelings (which are subjective internal states) and emotions (which may be tied to physical changes in the body, linked to increased heart rate, for example). For decades, it was (probably wrongly) assumed that humans were uniquely able to decouple their feelings from the physical expression of emotions on their faces. We could choose to fake a smile, but a chimp’s face just reveals its internal state.
Now, the more researchers look, the more that they’re clocking just how sophisticated animals can be—not only in terms of recognizing facial expressions  but also in self-regulating their behavior, including their facial expressions, in pursuit of longer-term goals.
Leanne Proops, professor of Animal Behaviour and Welfare at the University of Portsmouth, studies horse facial expressions—and how horses react to the faces of their fellow horses. In one study, Leanne and her fellow researchers taped large photos of horse faces to a wall and then let dozens of horses come and inspect the photos for themselves. (Before I reveal the findings of this whimsical study, try to guess what each of these horse faces signals):
From left to right, these faces move from kindly and relaxed to aggressive. We may not see it—because we’re not naturally attuned to read horse facial expressions for our survival—but 100% of the horses in one of Leanne’s studies [ https://substack.com/redirect/3517b20f-c88f-438d-af53-7210a25feb29?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] approached the positive horse face first and initially avoided the more aggressive or negative horse face, even though it was only a printed picture.
Moreover, as Leanne tells me, horses are one of many animals that have been observed altering their facial expressions and behavior in pursuit of specific goals, including in their interactions with humans:
“It has now been shown that individuals can adapt their signalling depending on the context, which you would not expect if this was an automatic reflection of an internal state. So, for example, if a horse wants some food from a person, they will tend to produce visual signals such as head shaking that persist until the food is given. If a person is not paying attention, they will shift from primarily visual signals to auditory (perhaps stamping their foot) or tactile cues (e.g. pushing the person). These sorts of audience effects, where an animal adjusts their signal based on the properties of the audience, are now widely reported.”
Animal intentionality has been documented in other surprising ways. Multiple species—including cuttlefish [ https://substack.com/redirect/dec2325e-486e-482f-9822-0e8b7b9a9c77?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]!—have passed the “marshmallow test,” in which they avoid taking an immediate food reward in the hopes of receiving a tastier option if they wait a little bit. And some primates have been shown to deliberately avoid looking at tasty food [ https://substack.com/redirect/f3d9ef52-4d4f-43de-babd-2f909e79fc41?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] because they fear that their facial expression or facial gaze can alert a more dominant rival to its presence, thereby robbing them of the chance to eat it themselves.
What we don’t know—and probably can’t know—is what the subjective experience feels like to a chimpanzee when it appears to smile or laugh. For centuries, it has been assumed that to ascribe any emotionally complexity to animals would be a catastrophically unscientific error of anthropomorphism, in which we wrongly attribute human-like emotional states to animals simply because that’s how we automatically perceive their behavior. Do we wrongly ascribe joy to animals that appear to show joy on their human-like faces?
What recent research is making clear is that we may also be falling into an equally egregious perception trap: anthropectomy, in which we wrongly fail to attribute human-like emotional states to animals that actually possess them. 
A flurry of recent research seems to suggest that there is significant reason to believe the latter has occurred—and that many species of animals may experience complex inner lives, including with some human-like emotions expressed through human-like facial expressions.
The next time you look at your dog or cat, or pass by a horse that appears to be happily enjoying its day, consider the shared evolutionary pathway embedded within our respective facial muscles. For, as Darwin correctly argued, to understand ourselves we need to better understand other species: “He who understands baboon would do more toward metaphysics than Locke.”
Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. If you appreciated this essay and would like to support my work, please upgrade to a paid subscription for the low, low price of $5/month or $50/ year (only $4.16 per month). It gives you full access to the archive [ https://substack.com/redirect/eacc01fa-a9d6-48f4-bf2d-2fcac4f59941?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] of 225+ essays like this one and keeps my writing sustainable for the future.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.-ydcKgdJJkqWtVDcVHY4L2zpob_QPc5X2_3KHEkzR2g?