View this post on the web at https://www.forkingpaths.co/p/who-owns-your-genome

Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. This edition is free for all subscribers but if you’d like to support my work and keep my writing sustainable, please consider upgrading to a paid subscription for $5/month or $50/year. (Paid subscribers get full access to the archive of 230+ essays [ https://substack.com/redirect/3c1e4670-8df8-41cc-b7f4-1f6e1b073f4d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].)
In April, I received an intriguing e-mail advertising a research seminar at my university. “Given the ongoing debate over whether we can publish, you may be among the select few to ever see the results of this research,” it said. The talk was titled: The classified genetic history of the Lemba.
Thus began a descent down a fascinating rabbit hole into the thorny philosophical debates that define modern research into population genetics.
What happens when longstanding historical narratives of identity collide with hard genetic evidence? Should DNA scientists always publish findings that could destroy a population’s sense of itself? And, if not, who gets to decide which kinds of scientific research are too sensitive to release?
I: The Lost Tribe of Israel?
Several decades ago, Tudor Parfitt [ https://substack.com/redirect/ff8a1db9-4899-4e30-bf9b-d7d1ef6f4151?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], a scholar known in magazine profiles as the “British Indiana Jones,” was giving a lecture in South Africa on the topic of Ethiopian Jews. Most of the audience were white South Africans, but there was a small contingent in the back who were Black Africans dressed in yarmulkes, the Jewish skull cap. Parfitt was intrigued: at the time, there was no widely known Black African Jewish group anywhere remotely near southern Africa.
They were from a group known as the Lemba, which claimed ancient Jewish origins. Parfitt was skeptical, figuring that it was far more likely that any Jewish identity they had must have been imposed on them by a missionary at some point in the not-so-distant past. So, the Lemba invited him to see for himself, an offer that he eagerly accepted.
What he observed astonished and puzzled him: the Lemba were clearly engaged in Semitic traditions. There was the ritualized slaughter of animals, which was widespread in the Middle East but not sub-Saharan Africa. They kept kosher. They refused to intermarry [ https://substack.com/redirect/129e66a5-39e5-428f-a7fb-649ac7f3284d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] “with all other people that they referred to as wasenzhi, the gentiles.” They buried their dead with their heads facing toward Jerusalem. They practiced male circumcision. 
Here were 100,000 people, 4,000 miles from Israel, who also followed the call of the shofar [ https://substack.com/redirect/c95ce5d0-c268-4308-aa1c-629993d5019e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
Their customs seemed Jewish, or more broadly Semitic, but that flew in the face of established history. The idea that a “lost tribe of Israel” had migrated thousands of years ago and ended up in South Africa and Zimbabwe sounded like absurdist folklore.
But the Lemba had their own origin story. As they told Parfitt, in a tale passed down through countless generations, their ancient ancestors left the north, possibly Judea, and went to a settlement known to them as “Sena.” From there, they crossed “Pusela” and wound their way down to what we now call Zimbabwe and South Africa. As Parfitt recalls, these sounded like completely unknown locations: “We don't know what that is, and they don't know what that is, but they say, ‘We crossed Pusela and we came to Africa.’”
Parfitt sought Sena, looked for Pusela, and even managed to help identify an ancient historical artefact called the Ngoma Lungundu [ https://substack.com/redirect/817115ba-f0e3-4a82-9562-ebb9dc2a8a97?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], that was deemed to be an African version of the Biblical Ark of the Covenant—now on display in a Zimbabwe museum after being discovered in a cave in 1952.
But all of this seemed so outlandish. Parfitt’s colleagues, he recalls, teased him when he took these oral traditions seriously. What they didn’t know is that he had a plan to silence his academic critics. Genetic science had improved by the mid-1990s. With a few little cheek swabs, he could enlist scientists to verify the Lemba’s oral tradition and give empirical weight to what had been easily dismissed as mere folklore.
With methods focused on the Y chromosome (that are crude compared to some of today’s more fine-grained genetic analyses), the results from the swabs came back. Preliminary analysis [ https://substack.com/redirect/5da3ea07-109e-4097-a0b7-b0e894e9463c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], led by Mark Thomas of University College London, found evidence of the so-called “Cohen Modal Haplotype [ https://substack.com/redirect/39c4a506-b892-4dc1-8e68-958919171c0c?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].” 
As the scientists wrote in 2000: “ one of the Lemba clans carries, at a very high frequency, a particular Y-chromosome type termed the ‘Cohen modal haplotype,’ which is known to be characteristic of the paternally inherited Jewish priesthood and is thought, more generally, to be a potential signature haplotype of Judaic origin.” This genetic marker pops up throughout populations of the Jewish priesthood—and it popped up in the Lemba, too.
Suddenly, there was a seemingly ironclad link from traditional oral history to scientific certainty. PBS made a NOVA program [ https://substack.com/redirect/7fb5e5e2-37ab-4143-9c37-d7c196bf7ed8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] called the “Lost Tribes of Israel.” The New York Times published a high-profile article [ https://substack.com/redirect/bf1d4611-821c-4434-a54a-355940da6730?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]: DNA Backs a Tribe’s Tradition Of Early Descent From the Jews. 
It was a major international news story, framed as the “discovery” of a “lost” tribe, as though they had somehow gone missing. Soon, Jews from America and Israel, who felt an affinity with their newly verified brethren, traveled to the Lemba [ https://substack.com/redirect/a774d4a7-f074-42e2-885d-8337dde52a05?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], which further solidified the Lemba’s sense of Jewish descent. One bit of DNA analysis was enough to shift the group’s identity, to create formal recognition, and to form fresh international relationships.
But what if the original research was overstated, or if people excited by the “Indiana Jones” narrative of a researcher discovering an ancient “lost” tribe were too eager to overinterpret the science to fit their preferred story? What if scientific techniques later improved and the confirmation of the Lemba’s oral tradition morphed into the destruction of it after they had already been internationally seen as an ancient Jewish group? 
And, what if the scientists who have made fresh discoveries by running analyses on the Lemba’s genetic markers—merely in pursuit of the scientific and historic truth—began to get death threats when they prepared their results for publication?
II: Bigots From Atlantis to the Ancient Apocalypse
There are a lot of strange, obsessive people who lurk on the internet and get viscerally excited at the possibility of misusing modern science to affirm their prejudices and hatred. Some want to identify apparently innate genetic differences by sex to oppress women; others salivate at “proof” that desirable and undesirable traits differ by race.
Warping science as a tool of oppression has a long history. The early 19th century American naturalist and doctor Samuel Morton arguably pioneered this unfortunate field [ https://substack.com/redirect/70d34fee-45c5-4599-b505-12841caef7c4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], wrongly claiming that he could infer intellectual capability from racial skull capacity—thereby bolstering his ahistorical claim that each race of humans was created separately in Biblical times, with races more akin to different species than varieties within ourselves.
Over time, this pseudoscience and misrepresentation has become more sophisticated in its manipulation of data and science, with complex genetic markers being bundled into ham-fisted subjective assessments of how genomes could be easily read to identify normatively desirable complex traits. (Hint: they can’t.)
Nonetheless, wherever you look in the history of DNA science research, there are those who will take legitimate, nuanced, carefully presented findings and twist them into an unrecognizable ideology driving toward an oppressive political agenda. The 1999 New York Times article written by the Lemba, for example, was penned by Nicholas Wade, who went on to write the 2014 book, A Troublesome Inheritance, which provoked a robust backlash from the very scientists who produced the work he cited in his book. As they wrote: 
“Wade juxtaposes an incomplete and inaccurate account of our research on human genetic differences with speculation that recent natural selection has led to worldwide differences in I.Q. test results, political institutions and economic development. We reject Wade’s implication that our findings substantiate his guesswork. They do not. We are in full agreement that there is no support from the field of population genetics for Wade’s conjectures.”
Other conjectures have amassed enormous audiences with absurd racist claims that make a mockery of historical and scientific evidence. The 2022 Netflix program Ancient Apocalypse, for example, broadly repackages similar claims to the easily debunked 1882 book Atlantis: The Antediluvian World by the Minnesotan utopian populist politician Ignatius L. Donnelly [ https://substack.com/redirect/5b93bdf6-523a-48d5-8643-7ec98961623d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. That book argued that a white master race on Atlantis dragged humanity from barbarism to civilization, then spread its advances outward, such that every technological innovation from ancient China to the Mayans flourished from a single white seed.
The Netflix series, fronted by Graham Hancock [ https://substack.com/redirect/fa8b4dc6-4ef1-40c9-a952-e942f087ab9d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], draws on Hancock’s ridiculous and thoroughly debunked 1990s work that explicitly claims that the grand achievements of non-white civilizations were actually produced by a lost precursor civilization of white, bearded men [ https://substack.com/redirect/e82ddf61-c757-452a-8269-c67989ff6a97?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. But such is our culture that the show was ranked in the Top 10 most watched programs on Netflix in 31 countries upon its release.
There is good reason, therefore, for one’s antennae for detecting bigots to perk up whenever population genetics research is being invoked to make sweeping claims. “We’re just following the science” has long been a rallying call for those who have used falsely neutral language to misrepresent data and twist findings to fit their worldview. 
But there are other times when the very same scientific methods can also eviscerate the lies of white supremacists—and support indigenous populations in amplifying their own historical truths.
III: Kennewick Man and the Double-Edged Helix
On Sunday, July 28, 1996, two 21 year-old college students, Will Thomas and Dave Deacy, were trying to sneak into a boat race near Kennewick, Washington, without tickets. As they waded through the shallow water on the riverbank, one of them stubbed their toe [ https://substack.com/redirect/5af2bf00-bdbc-4eb0-a58b-e62418bfb166?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] on a hard object. Groping through the water to investigate, they were surprised to find a fully intact human skull.
Since the races were starting, though, they stashed the skull in the bushes, watched the races, and then returned to the mysterious human remains. They brought the skull to the police, who put the skull in a plastic bucket, then called in the local coroner. Perplexed, he called in a forensic anthropologist. “Hey, buddy, I got a skull for you to look at,” the coroner told him.
The anthropologist, James Chatters, presumed that it was most likely the skull of a settler, probably more than 100 years old. He instantly identified what he called “Caucasoid” features, a now outdated term in physical anthropology with ugly origins. 
“I thought maybe we had an early pioneer or fur trapper,” he told a New Yorker reporter. Chatters looked around him, using his expertise in skull analysis to imagine what Kennewick Man would have looked like. “And then, one evening, I turned on the TV, and there was Patrick Stewart”—Captain Picard, of ‘Star Trek’—“and I said, ‘My God, there he is! Kennewick Man!” he recalled [ https://substack.com/redirect/5af2bf00-bdbc-4eb0-a58b-e62418bfb166?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
Chatters got a second opinion. That forensic expert reached a similar conclusion. But when the remains were scanned, they found an injury caused by a spearhead that was indicative of ancient indigenous communities in the Americas. Perplexed by the clues pointing in seemingly opposite directions, they decided to get a more definitive answer with radiocarbon dating. 
When the results came back to Chatters, he was dumbfounded: the skull belonged to a man who had died roughly 9,000 years ago. Chatters was now the custodian of one of the most important sets of human remains ever found in the Americas. 
Though Chatters was merely trying to quickly classify the skull to the best of his ability, his comments unleashed a horrifying, multi-decade fight over what was now called Kennewick Man, or The Ancient One, the latter name used by Native Americans.
Because of the skull’s seemingly “Caucasoid” features, some began trumpeting the discovery as proof positive that there had been a 9,000 year-old “white person [ https://substack.com/redirect/05883954-834e-4398-9f26-0dc6eebae7a1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]” in the Americas. This unleashed widespread speculation that Europeans had been in North America before indigenous communities. Some even claimed that Native Americans had wiped out European settlers, reversing the historical narrative.
The fight over the remains quickly took on racial lines. Scientists wanted to study the bones. Then, the Asatru Folk Assembly, a white nationalist pagan group, claimed the remains, saying they were confirmed their belief of white ancestors who had populated the Americas. And Native communities in the Pacific Northwest demanded that the remains be treated with respect and dignity and given a proper burial in accordance with their traditional customs.
The government granted scientists access to the remains in 2004. After improvements in technology, DNA analysis in 2015 [ https://substack.com/redirect/87b99364-94d9-4f0f-b996-818c5f70283b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] definitively settled the debate: Kennewick Man was, by far, most closely related to modern Native Americans with a particular genetic closeness to the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, who now live mostly in northeastern Washington state. The Kennewick Man remains were given an indigenous re-burial in February 2017 at an undisclosed location.
This is the double-edged helix of population genetics: there are plenty of cases where indigenous communities vehemently objected to genetic research, most notably the Havasupai [ https://substack.com/redirect/78a0219a-af60-43b5-ba32-3dffa27c7503?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. But with Kennewick Man, it was the scientists who vindicated indigenous claims, not the other way around.
IV: Should the Lemba’s Genes Be Classified Data?
Garrett Hellenthal is a soft-spoken statistics guru, who spends his days at University College London coding and data-crunching, thereby revealing the historical origins of our modern-day populations. With a math degree and a statistics PhD, he takes pleasure in using numbers to make sophisticated inferences that are otherwise hidden, buried somewhere in the genetic traces left behind by people who can no longer speak for themselves. 
“Humans are an interactive species,” he noted in a TEDx talk, “and it turns out that we really enjoy exchanging DNA with one another.” With powerful analytical tools, he can look deep into the distant past and see who exchanged what, where, and when.
Hellenthal’s research on the Lemba, though, has found him navigating whether he can tell people the answers he finds. And that’s because the technology got more sophisticated—so some answers became more nuanced.
Over time, research began to show a murkier picture: there was certainly some non-African heritage within the Lemba, but whether it could be proven to be definitively Jewish in origin was becoming far less certain. Was it possible that the previous Y chromosome data was better explained by later intermixing? Perhaps a few male traders came down from the Middle East and fathered children. Could some of the genetic data be accounted for by Indian traders who have some overlap with Lemba genes? There were many possibilities that were more complex than either simply verifying or debunking the Lemba’s own origin story.
With colleagues and research students, Hellenthal probed the data—and they found more sophisticated, but also more uncertain, answers. 
Yet, even before he gave any indication of the findings one way or another, the backlash began. The discoveries are done. The paper has been written. But it has sat in a proverbial file drawer, collecting digital dust, for three years. Some in the Lemba community never want it to be published. 
Part of the problem comes from the relational nature of population genetics. Bioethics typically operates on the basis of individual informed consent. But a single person consenting to having their genome studied can reveal information about the rest of the family or larger group that hasn’t consented. (This has come as unfortunate news to several at-large serial killers, who are finding themselves incarcerated because an unknown distant relative uploaded their genetic data [ https://substack.com/redirect/f582c3fa-29c9-4a0c-9f1e-73da15265b3e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] to an ancestry database.)
In the case of the Lemba, some of the data came from an older generation that was excited about the prospects of validating their oral tradition through genetic testing. Now, some of their children are more skeptical, concerned that the scientists may come up with results they don’t like—or that outsiders will twist the results to their own agendas. But who controls the information contained in a freely given decades-old cheek swab?
Creating more wrinkles, genetic research doesn’t just help us understand origins and migration. It also can be useful in medical research that can help under-studied populations. Should some members of a community have the power to block genetic testing that could save others within it?
Then, there’s a bizarre tendency to imagine that genetic data provides definitive answers to questions about something so complex and multifaceted as a community’s identity. 
Debunking a historic narrative with archaeology and manuscripts is seen, by some, to provide more wiggle room that remains open to interpretation. Yet, genetic data can too often be interpreted through an essentialist lens because it’s about a fixed characteristic of a person’s body and their ancestral heritage, which feels less amenable to subjective interpretation. Few people would object to a historian who uncovers archival information that challenges a narrative that may be false; many object to those who work on population genetics, even if they’re asking similar questions.
There’s also the asymmetries of power—and the distributed costs and benefits at stake. If researchers from prestigious Western universities publish interesting findings about the Lemba, it can spur NOVA documentaries, New York Times features, conference presentations, and career-advancing publications. There are few potential downsides. But for the Lemba, research has already reshaped their identity, created an influx of interest from outsiders, and, depending on the findings, either affirmed their origin story or called it into question. The stakes, for them, are higher.
Hellenthal takes these critiques seriously—and often emphasizes the absurdity of racism and genetic essentialism given the rampant intermixing of populations throughout the last several thousand years of human history. But when he began to work on the case of the Lemba, he found himself wrapped up in a contentious debate on the frontline of these sensitive questions.
While travelling to southern Africa, he spoke to some members of the Lemba community who were eager to support his work: “They just wanted to know the answer” he tells me over coffee in London. “Many of the people I spoke to just really didn’t like the uncertainty.” That impulse is easy to recognize: many people use modern genetics and ancestry tools to better understand where they came from. Hellenthal was offering fresh insights for the Lemba with a level of scientific detail unavailable to the general public.
But others felt differently. He received death threats from some activists within the Lemba community who wanted him to shut up, stop researching, and go away—ideally forever.
There are therefore good reasons to be extremely careful with population genetics research given its horrifying misuse past and present. But we need not succumb to false genetic essentialist interpretations of identity nor should we allow those who hijack research for ideological bigotry to deter scientists from seeking empirical evidence about matters of historical fact.
Hellenthal’s research on the Lemba is clearly designed to ask and answer an objective, straightforward question that passes no judgment: where did the Lemba’s ancestors likely come from? In my view, with extreme consideration and care, the research should be published, the nuanced results “declassified.”
Thank you for reading The Garden of Forking Paths. This edition was free for everyone, but if you’d like to support my writing and keep this sustainable, please consider upgrading to a paid subscription for just $5/month or $50/year. (Every subscription helps and paid subscribers get full access to the archive of 230+ essays [ https://substack.com/redirect/3c1e4670-8df8-41cc-b7f4-1f6e1b073f4d?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].)

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.sNEERhiMM3w8wtA84SqPRB8gERaiAJXvGoLOHn0ytI8?