View this post on the web at https://www.workingtheorys.com/p/great-movie-theory

Every creator’s ultimate ambition is to achieve cinematic immortality. Even the ‘great men’ who shape history, consciously or not, are driven by this goal.
Great Men, Great Movies
The Great Man Theory says history is shaped largely by extraordinary individuals—heroes whose exceptional qualities—brilliance, courage, leadership, even divine inspiration—change the world. In tech, politics, and sports this theory thrives. Silicon Valley especially loves its "great men" and runs on the perpetual quest to find the next Jobs, Zuckerberg, and Musk.
Yet, many so-called great men were not solely the product of their ideas or will—they were inspired by something greater: great stories told through art, and, importantly, film, that preceded them.
Elon Musk was captivated [ https://substack.com/redirect/f76606bd-9b5d-4344-9335-75c50ea6a09e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] by Star Wars at age 6. Musk, Trump, and Jobs inspired the persona [ https://substack.com/redirect/f30d6daa-0bd1-4c75-9da1-26d3655c33d3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] of Tony Stark, the genius billionaire in Iron Man. Stark Industries, in turn, inspired Palmer Luckey’s defense startup Anduril (named [ https://substack.com/redirect/0782e009-4cf8-4d0e-93bd-1b1249cc4e81?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] after a sword from The Lord of the Rings.) Mark Zuckerberg connected the world with Facebook, but The Social Network immortalized his rise, inspiring [ https://substack.com/redirect/5fb99c73-bf3b-4680-8235-69cb2f4234cc?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] an entire generation of entrepreneurs.
The Great Man Theory, attributed to philosopher Thomas Carlyle, says history is shaped by extraordinary people. I see you, Mr. Carlyle, and I raise you my own theory: The Great Movie Theory says history is shaped by extraordinary films—masterpieces of storytelling that embed themselves into culture—inspiring great men and society alike, and leaving a lasting mark on the world.
The three central tenets of the theory:
Cinema mirrors, shapes, and inspires greatness.
Films don’t just reflect culture—they redefine it. Great movies offer blueprints for success, love, revolution, and self-discovery, reshaping how we see the world and ourselves. These stories, with their iconic characters and themes, shape the ambitions of those who go on to shape history.
Greatness is immortalized through great movies.
True greatness is validated and made timeless through film. A legacy gains weight when it enters the cinematic canon, transcending its origins to become part of our shared history.
All creation aspires to a cinematic legacy.
Everything we create—from skyscrapers to songs, books, and businesses—seeks a legacy worthy of the big screen. Consciously or not, creators aspire to make something worthy of its place in a great film. Even 'great men' are driven by the desire to see their stories told and immortalized on film.
In short: Humans are driven by stories, and movies tell stories in a way that uniquely elevates our consciousness, lifting us out of the mundane to explore the metaphysical in our pursuit of greatness.
A great movie is the ultimate form of a story.
While many would agree that stories shape history, some might be skeptical of movies as the highest form of storytelling. So—why movies?
A movie is the complete expression of a story.
Once finished, movies are whole—no mandate for upgrades or adaptations. This feeling of cohesion and finality is rare in other forms of creation. Software is perpetually evolving, and games offer infinite paths. But movies are standalone works ready to be carried forward by an audience.
Movies are the pinnacle of storytelling.
Essayists want to write books. Authors want their books adapted for film. YouTubers dream of breaking into TV and film. Actors, directors, and producers strive to create global hits and win Oscars. Whether through legacy institutions or not, movies are the final form of storytelling.
All stories are written with the screen in mind.
Take The Social Network—based on The Accidental Billionaires by Ben Mezrich, who writes books specifically intended for film adaptation. “Mezrich’s books aren’t books. They’re intellectual property designed for Hollywood… a first draft intended for the screen.” I don’t think his approach is unique, but his self-awareness and honesty are. 
Movies are instruments of great cultural power.
Narrative is the greatest force shaping the world, and everyone knows it. The rich and powerful all flock to media and movies. Amazon Studios and Apple TV+ are no accident. Billionaire tech moguls understand that rich media is more than entertainment—it’s a central force in shaping culture, driving commerce, influencing politics and public consciousness, and creating legacy.
Ultimately, great movies are the most powerful storytelling tool we have. And while technology—AI included—may give us new tools, the essence of movies as a medium will endure for a long, long time.
The pursuit of greatness runs through film.
It’s fitting that it’s Academy Awards—Oscars—season. People love to argue about how little these awards matter in the age of endless online content, where TikTok and YouTube are kingmakers, and how Hollywood is “dead.” 
Yet, when Timothée Chalamet accepted the Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor last week, his speech went viral and everyone extolled its virtues. We’ve been starved for talk of greatness—and Chalamet stepped up as our hero, making the pursuit of greatness cool again and reaffirming that movies are a powerful vehicle to achieve it. 
Man's pursuit of greatness is the pursuit of a great film. After all, a book’s highest prize isn’t a National Book Award—it’s inspiring the next Harry Potter movie series. A musician’s legacy isn’t just defined by their Grammys—it grows with an acclaimed biopic like A Complete Unknown. A startup’s crowning achievement isn’t an IPO—it’s inspiring a film as iconic as The Social Network.
“Everyone just wants to make a movie,” I’ve said [ https://substack.com/redirect/9b03e2fd-eba0-4af1-a844-dc6b6ae5921f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].
I don’t mean everyone wants to literally make a film, though many do. What I mean is everyone wants to create something worthy of being woven into the fabric of a great film—admired, retold, and immortalized. Because immortality isn’t found in fame or wealth—it’s in having a great story told in a great movie. To be clear—I’m not suggesting everyone should pivot to filmmaking, but whatever you create, aspire to enter it into the cultural canon. 
Movies make history. History makes movies. Great men are immortalized in both.
Thanks for reading. If you enjoyed this essay, consider sharing with a friend who might enjoy it too.

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.6VIkUjy1FSApqKTfsfTC4xu_jkovaeeP0GMAcieUvuE?