View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/liars-archaeology

Thanks for reading!  To support my work, please click the button below to subscribe:
If you want to help keep this project going, you can purchase a paid subscription. Paid subscribers — it’s only about 75 cents a week! — get access to the archives and my undying gratitude (thank you, paid subscribers!).
This is a long post, so your email provider may cut it off. Make sure to click “View Entire Message” to see the whole thing.
A certain young German wheeler-dealer was lucky in business but unlucky in love. 
He had grown up poor, dropped out of school, and fled from home on a boat to Venezuela at age 19. The boat never made it; it crashed in the Netherlands, where he took a job in imports and exports. He possessed a gift for learning languages, or so he said, which allowed him to do business in any country in the world. He first went to St. Petersburg and then to the United States, where he profited from the Gold Rush. By his mid-30s, he was a very wealthy man. 
It was in 1850, when California became a state, that he gained his American citizenship. He witnessed a catastrophic fire in San Francisco, wrote about it, and had dinner with President Fillmore in Washington. 
Or maybe nothing in the previous paragraph is true; historians say he constructed his stories about the fire and the presidential dinner from newspaper accounts and didn’t get his citizenship until 1869.   
This is the problem with Heinrich Schliemann. The very tendencies that made him so successful — infinite self-belief, an ability to spin a good story, and a love of adventure — made him a deeply unreliable narrator. He was an inveterate liar, and his life story is full of inconsistencies.
Anyway, on to the love story, or lack thereof. Schliemann returned to Russia, partially because some of his California customers had begun grumbling that Schliemann shortchanged them. By this point, he’d made so much money buying and selling indigo dye that he’d never have to work again. In Russia, he settled down with a woman named Ekaterina, a relative of one of his business partners, and immediately regretted it. 
The marriage was unhappy. Ekaterina didn’t want to travel the world with Heinrich, and she didn’t want to reside in Paris, where her husband wished to live. So Heinrich left her and the kids behind most of the time as he indulged his interests, which were increasingly centered around the new field of archaeology. 
Over time, the marriage began to seem untenable. So Heinrich went to the divorce capital of the world: Indianapolis [ https://substack.com/redirect/e875f3e3-edeb-44b1-bb41-a03ccf53102f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. In the 1860s, Indiana had famously lax divorce laws compared to the rest of the United States and the world. “Divorce hunting men and women [ https://substack.com/redirect/e875f3e3-edeb-44b1-bb41-a03ccf53102f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]” traveled from all over to dump their spouses. 
Heinrich took a steamer across the Atlantic, lied on his American citizenship application (he pretended [ https://substack.com/redirect/5dc310e9-f19b-4f42-a15e-ab8e2816d086?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] he had been living in the U.S. for five years), and filed for divorce a week later. He lied on those documents, too, saying he had lived in Indiana for a year. But he got the divorce anyway after showing the judge his wife’s translated letters, in which she refused to move from Russia to live with him (this, too, was dishonest: he mistranslated them to read that she was unwilling to move to Indiana, where he pretended to live).
Immediately after securing his divorce, Schliemann moved to Athens. He asked a friend there to find him a Greek woman to marry. The friend obliged, proffering his 17-year-old relative Sophia Engastromenos. They were married two months after Schliemann’s divorce. They eventually had two children; their daughter was named Andromache and their son was named Agamemnon. 
Agamemnon was, as you may know, the name of the great Greek king of the Trojan War. In the myths, his family is cursed. He sacrifices his daughter Iphigenia to the gods and egotistically steals a slave woman from Achilles, which leads to the tragedy of the Iliad. In the end, his wife, Clytemnestra, kills him to avenge the death of Iphigenia. It is, to say the least, an unusual choice for a little boy’s name. 
But, as we’ve seen by now, Heinrich Schliemann was a very unusual man. As Kathrin Maurer writes, he “staged his life as a spectacle [ https://substack.com/redirect/8b434fd0-4b01-4dc7-b9d1-3a86fe5cb8c4?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ].” He did not stop until he had what he wanted. 
And what he wanted, in the 1860s, was to spend his remaining years finding the sites of the Iliad. Obsessed with the Greek epics since boyhood (at least that’s what he later told people) he had come to believe, unlike many of his contemporaries, that the Trojan War had really happened. In the 1870s, he set out to prove it. 
Schliemann, having read the work of British archaeologist Frank Calvert (I use the term “archaeologist” loosely here — as we will soon see, archaeology was very much an amateur endeavor in these days), decided that a place called Hissarlik, in what’s now western Turkey, was the site of the city of Troy. There, an artificial-looking hill loomed above the plains: 
Schliemann ordered his men to cut a trench through the hill; they found nine layers of ancient urban habitation built on top of one another. 
His methods were aggressive even by the standards of the time; some archaeologists have accused him of treasure-hunting rather than carefully excavating and documenting his finds. 
As his crews dug, he found massive storage jars:
And the walls of ancient dwellings:
In the most ancient layers, there were simple pieces of pottery:
The inhabitants of the city apparently went through a phase where they were really into owls:
 And there was more pottery than you could imagine:
In the more modern layers, Schliemann found elegant little sculptures:
And a beautiful Temple of Athena, featuring this relief of Helios:
Schliemann thought that the layer he called “the burnt city” was the Troy of the Iliad because it showed signs of destruction. He was wrong; the layer was more than 1,000 years too old to have been Homer’s subject. In his zeal to find the “real” Troy, he dug through and destroyed much of what he was actually looking for.
But he did find a great treasure, which he claimed had been owned by the great Trojan king Priam (it wasn’t; the artifacts are much too old). He said that he excavated it himself while his men ate lunch, with the help of only his wife. This wasn’t true — Sophie was in Athens at the time.
The treasure included some fancy women’s jewelry:
Heinrich thought Sophia might look nice in it:
When Sophia wore the jewelry — which she and Schliemann claimed were the necklaces and diadem of Helen of Troy herself — in public, it caused a stir. Even in the 1870s, it was not OK to take the most valuable finds from an archaeological site, smuggle them out of their country of origin, and wear them to parties. 
The Ottoman government launched an investigation, imprisoned the official who was supposed to be monitoring Schliemann, and banned Schliemann from digging in Turkey (he later paid a large fine and was allowed back in). Schliemann would eventually go on to dig at other ancient sites, most notably Mycenae.
“Priam’s treasure” — the most valuable finds of Schliemann’s dig at Troy — didn’t stay in Schliemann’s possession forever. Schliemann offered some of it to a museum in Istanbul as part of his peace offering to gain access to Troy again, but most of it ended up in Berlin museums. During World War II, Schliemann’s finds were hidden with other priceless artifacts under the Berlin Zoo [ https://substack.com/redirect/5869f5eb-e2b3-4021-8bcb-cbf2625ab768?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ]. When the Soviets took Berlin, the treasure disappeared from public view.
Though many rumors swirled about the fate of Priam’s treasure, the obvious explanation ended up being the true one: the Soviet Army had taken Priam’s treasure back to Moscow. In true Schliemannian fashion, the Pushkin Museum dissembled for decades, pretending not to have it. The treasure was finally reintroduced to the public in 1994 (Germany has pushed [ https://substack.com/redirect/43447733-f04a-4dc7-b2f4-59c4c649fdc8?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ] to have the treasure returned to Berlin, which is pretty rich considering it probably ought to be in Turkey; Russia has refused to give it up).
The sordid fate of Priam’s treasure encapsulates so much about Heinrich Schliemann’s career as an amateur archaeologist. It’s a spectacular find, of course, but its legacy is impossible to disentangle from Schliemann’s web of lies and ethical breaches. Like so many 19th-century archaeologists, he combined a sincere obsession with discovering historical truth with an arrogance and recklessness that diminished his considerable successes. He was, if nothing else, one of history’s great characters — a dreamer, a charlatan, a showman, and a scholar all wrapped into one. 
This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: 
You can subscribe as a free or paying member:
Or you can share the newsletter with others:
Thanks for reading, and I’ll see you again next week!

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.l7iDiWXsKkMke3w3_1PVm6UE1A2ylWnjHZkaiMGQ7Y8?