View this post on the web at https://worldhistory.substack.com/p/drawings-from-the-bottom-of-the-world

On May 8, 1842, Jules Dumont d’Urville and his family enjoyed a lovely day in the gardens of Versailles, which were open to the public as part of a celebration hosted by King Louis Philippe I. In the late afternoon, they boarded one of two available trains to head back to Paris. They would never make it back home.
Near Bellevue, the lead locomotive’s axle broke in two, causing it to derail. The second train plowed right into the fiery wreckage of the first, also derailing and catching fire. Hundreds of passengers were stuck in burning train cars; at least fifty of them burned to death. Dumont, his wife Adele, and their child were killed. Dumont was so badly disfigured that an artist who had sculpted his likeness had to identify the skull.
This whole event was horribly tragic (especially since the rail cars had been locked from the outside, trapping people in an inferno), but also a little bit ironic, given what Jules Dumont d’Urville had survived before his day out at the gardens. 
He started his career in the French Navy under Napoleon, which was less dramatic than it sounds: he spent much of his time trapped in port by a British blockade. Then he sailed on a French ship throughout the Aegean Sea, playing a role in bringing the Venus de Milo to France. After that, his ship, the Coquille, headed south, exploring the cone of South America; an immensely curious botanist, Dumont brought back innumerable samples. 
After returning to France, he proposed something even more ambitious: a circumnavigation of the globe. He renamed the Coquille the Astrolabe and set sail in 1826, returning three years later with a huge amount of scientific information. In 1837, he proposed another, even more ambitious voyage around the world; this time the Astrolabe was accompanied by another ship, the Zelee. The king agreed, as long as Dumont tried, as part of the journey, to go further south than anyone ever had before. There wasn’t much left in the world that was still unexplored, but the South Pole still beckoned. 
Dumont’s voyage into the icy Southern Ocean, through the Strait of Magellan [ https://substack.com/redirect/1dfadefb-c30a-4a0e-a6dd-2ce1a34130a5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o ], and around Oceania was illustrated in a beautiful volume published in 1846, four years after his unfortunate death:
It contained a lot of images you might expect — maps, drawings of people in their native dress, notable buildings, and interesting sights like this canal in Indonesia:
Or this mosque, also in Indonesia: 
But mostly, I was struck by the placid beauty of the nature drawings that the expedition’s artist, Louis le Breton (a surgeon who had to take over drawing duty after the official artist left), created...

Unsubscribe https://substack.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.a8GYcja3a9Im7AT0VAIzIgejSLZtbGqFjykMToW-MFo?